FRENCH   Et ce qui l\'inquiétait surtout, devant cette petite vendeuse devenue peu à peu si redoutable, c\'était qu\'il ne croyait point à son désintéressement, à la franchise de ses refus.
FRENCH   Le soir, la première table était à cinq heures.
ENGLISH   On the first floor, however, a small window overlooking the yard enabled her to obtain a vague glimpse of the rotten staircase, the walls black with dirt and the cracked, discoloured doors.
FRENCH   Secoue-toi un peu, ne reste pas écrasé ainsi...
FRENCH   Comme il donnait pourtant les dernières pièces à Hutin, il reprit à voix basse:  -- Dites donc, j\'oubliais...
FRENCH   Cette vente tuait le seul rêve de sa vie, son coeur en saignait comme de la perte d\'une personne chère.
FRENCH   Alors, je ne me souviens plus comment les choses ont tourné.
FRENCH   Cette scène, qui l\'avait distrait du combat dont il était déchiré, augmentait sa fièvre maintenant, déterminait en lui la lutte suprême.
FRENCH    Il la pressait du regard, il attendait une réponse décisive.
FRENCH    -- Oh! dit-elle, regarde un peu, Jean!  Et ils restèrent plantés, serrés les uns contre les autres, tout en noir, achevant les vieux vêtements du deuil de leur père.
FRENCH   L\'espoir tenace les laissait debout, ils annonçaient toujours la déconfiture prochaine du Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH    -- Mais c\'est vous qu\'il aime!  Alors, Geneviève fit un geste désespéré.
ENGLISH   It was quite time she did so for her shoes were completely worn out.
ENGLISH   Some neighbours, aware of their quarrel on the previous day, began whispering together.
FRENCH   Deloche s\'était enfui.
ENGLISH   \"When you find something better, you can leave me.\"  She was afraid of him, and did the work so quickly that he was embarrassed to find her more.
FRENCH   À cette époque, le Vieil Elbeuf, qui existait depuis plus de soixante ans, était déjà tel que tu le vois aujourd\'hui...
FRENCH    Alors, avant de descendre dans le magasin jeter leur coup d\'oeil habituel, tous deux réglèrent encore certains détails.
FRENCH   Mais, à peine la conversation reprenait- elle, que deux légers cris s\'élevèrent:  -- Comment! c\'est toi, Paul!  -- Tiens! Octave!  Mouret et Vallagnosc se serraient les mains.
ENGLISH   And the spreading soul of Paris, in a huge but gentle breath, sank asleep in the serenity of the evening, hovering in prolonged, languid caresses over the last vehicles which were spinning through the streets, now slowly deserted by the crowd as it disappeared into the darkness of the night.
FRENCH   L\'un, petit et charmant, les reins solides, la peau rose, cherchait à marier des couleurs de soie, pour un étalage intérieur.
ENGLISH   And before this gushing cataract they all remained hesitating between a secret fear of being carried away by such a flood of luxury, and an irresistible desire to jump in and be lost in it.
FRENCH   Les travaux d\'en face étaient un continuel tourment qui avivait leur malchance.
FRENCH   Contez-moi vos petites affaires.
FRENCH    Elle s\'était relevée, elle déclara dans une révolte nouvelle.
ENGLISH   The girl felt that she was being treated like a servant by this imperious, whimsical customer; but she had vowed to do her duty, and retained her calm demeanour, notwithstanding the rising of her heart and rebellion of her pride.
FRENCH   Ils se rassuraient, regardaient la boutique, où leurs yeux s\'habituaient à l\'obscurité.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, donnez-nous des détails, répétait Mme de Boves avec insistance.
ENGLISH   She had just had a fright--old Jouve having nearly caught her talking to her husband behind a pile of dusters.
ENGLISH   \"We have run away from the noise.\"  He followed her into the next room.
ENGLISH   BAUDU, late HAUCHECORNE.\" The house, coated with ancient rusty paint, and quite flat and unadorned amidst the surrounding mansions of the Louis XIV.
FRENCH   Et, d\'ailleurs, il suffit que le public en profite.
FRENCH    -- C\'est la fabrication qui ne rit pas! dit alors Bouthemont.
FRENCH   Ce dernier, bel homme, portant les moustaches à l\'impériale, de l\'air militairement correct aimé des Tuileries, baisa la main de Mme Desforges, qu\'il avait connue jeune, chez son père.
FRENCH    -- Vous savez que les bobinards ont leur club, maintenant, raconta tout d\'un coup Mignot.
FRENCH   Avait-elle donc, elle aussi, une tendresse au coeur pour être si brave? Elle songeait encore à Hutin, pleine de malaise.
ENGLISH   Ah! yes, my boy, I enjoy life!\"  All the joy of action, all the gaiety of existence, resounded in Mouret\'s words.
ENGLISH   But the shopmen were even too indolent to laugh at them.
ENGLISH   On the opposite side of the street passers-by lingered in astonishment at seeing him waving his arms about while he carved his handles.
FRENCH   Il avait connu la jeune personne chez Mme Desforges, où il était venu beaucoup l\'autre hiver, mais où il ne reparaissait que rarement, ce qui expliquait comment il avait pu ne pas s\'y rencontrer avec Octave.
FRENCH   Il resta surpris.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s true we were talking, Monsieur Jouve,\" she stammered, \"but there\'s no harm in talking a bit.
FRENCH   Seulement, certains symptômes l\'inquiétaient: aux autres mises en vente, un mouvement se produisait dès le matin; puis, il ne voyait même pas de femmes en cheveux, les clientes du quartier, qui descendaient chez lui en voisines.
ENGLISH   \"What are you afraid of?\" he asked.
ENGLISH   He did not quit Denise, but clasped her to his breast in a desperate embrace, telling her that she might now go, that she could spend a month at Valognes which would silence everybody, and that then he would go to fetch her himself, and bring her back, all-powerful, as his wedded wife.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s settled; we won\'t speak about the marriage for another year.
ENGLISH   Jean had already returned to the street door yawning.
ENGLISH   This particular one with its brand-new medley of colours, and the name of the establishment painted on either side, whilst up above appeared an announcement of the day\'s sale, finished by going off at the fast trot of a splendid horse, after being filled with parcels left over from the previous night; and Baudu, who was standing on the threshold of The Old Elbeuf, watched it rolling off towards the boulevard, where it disappeared to spread amid a starry radiance the hated name of The Ladies\' Paradise all over Paris.
ENGLISH   But he soon left off talking of leaving, and began to stir up all the abominable accusations which were current amongst the salesmen against their chiefs.
ENGLISH   Then Mouret added that he was no longer able to prevent things following their course.
FRENCH    Ce fut le comble.
ENGLISH   There\'s no resisting you.
FRENCH   Et elles emprisonnaient Mouret plus étroitement, elles l\'accablaient de nouvelles questions.
FRENCH   Ils veulent avoir de la prudence pour vous.
FRENCH    Justement, Favier métrait du foulard blanc pour la «jolie dame», cette blonde élégante, une habituée du comptoir, que les vendeurs ne désignaient que par ces mots.
FRENCH    -- Non, merci, répondit la jeune fille avec sa tranquille obstination.
FRENCH   Il était femme, elles se sentaient pénétrées et possédées par ce sens délicat qu\'il avait de leur être secret, et elles s\'abandonnaient, séduites; tandis que lui, certain dès lors de les avoir à sa merci, apparaissait, trônant brutalement au-dessus d\'elles, comme le roi despotique du chiffon.
FRENCH   Comme il marche!  -- Il a son cor, ajouta Pauline qui s\'était penchée.
ENGLISH   For instance, at the house of one of them, the district commissary of police had found two hundred and forty-eight pairs of pink gloves stolen from well nigh every shop in Paris.
FRENCH    Un silence se fit.
ENGLISH   Oh! you\'re a good fellow, and I\'m quite willing to be your friend, but nothing more.
ENGLISH   This woman, who appeared to be suffering a great deal from the jostling of the crowd, was accompanied by a friend, whose mission seemed to be to protect her against all hurt, and each time she stopped in a department, Jouve kept his eyes on her, whilst her friend near by ransacked the card-board boxes at her ease.
ENGLISH   However, she found her way.
FRENCH   Très prévenante, Mme Aurélie l\'obligeait à s\'appuyer sur son épaule.
ENGLISH   To-day\'s work will be very hard; we shall be able to judge of your capabilities.\"  Despite her prophecies, the department still remained deserted; very few customers came to buy mantles at this early hour.
FRENCH    It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
ENGLISH   Take care, you\'re pricking me now!\"  Twice again did Mouret vainly attempt to interfere, in order to put an end to this scene.
FRENCH   La plume crachait; les mots: J\'ai volé, appuyés rageusement, faillirent crever le papier mince, tandis qu\'elle répétait, la voix étranglée:  -- Voilà, monsieur, voilà monsieur...
FRENCH   Baugé y compte, ma chère.
FRENCH   Tous deux s\'étaient lancé un regard de rancune.
FRENCH    Elle s\'animait.
FRENCH   Mais on aurait trouvé en outre, au fond de ce changement, le réveil d\'une ambition ancienne, l\'espoir effrayé et peu à peu élargi de manger à son tour Mouret, devant lequel il avait si longtemps courbé l\'échine.
ENGLISH   All at once he cried out: \"Hang it, I\'m going in for an extra! Victor, give me another jam!\"  The waiter was finishing the serving of the desserts.
FRENCH   La fin du dîner fut ainsi très gaie.
ENGLISH   And you are all of you very unreasonable, to be amusing yourselves with such childish matters, when our time is so precious.\"  Just at that moment, as Clara was not paying any attention to the packages, a catastrophe took place.
FRENCH   Baugé sortit même avant lui; et Baugé d\'habitude quittait la salle le dernier, faisait un détour et rencontrait Pauline, au moment où celle-ci se rendait au réfectoire des dames: c\'était une manoeuvre arrêtée entre eux, la seule manière de se voir une minute, durant les heures de travail.
FRENCH   De puissantes lampes électriques furent établies, et le branle ne cessa plus: des équipes se succédaient, les marteaux n\'arrêtaient pas, les machines sifflaient continuellement, la clameur toujours aussi haute semblait soulever et semer le plâtre.
FRENCH   Mon cher Lhomme, votre Albert est un étourdi qui devrait bien prendre exemple sur vous.
FRENCH   Aussi, nuit et jour, se creusait-il la tête, à la recherche de trouvailles nouvelles.
ENGLISH   Come, come, you others, don\'t look so glum!\"  But he could not enliven them.
ENGLISH   Competition now went on under the very eyes of the public; a look in the windows enabled people to contrast the prices of different establishments; and each shop in turn was lowering its rates, contenting itself with the smallest possible profit.
FRENCH    Cependant, Denise avait cru remarquer une inquiétude naissante, dans le regard jeté par Geneviève sur Colomban.
ENGLISH    \"Come, come!\" he suddenly exclaimed, \"we must make room for the others.
ENGLISH   Her confusion increased at finding herself thus on exhibition, and she had decided to take half an hour\'s walk in the neighbourhood, when the sight of a young man approaching rapidly by way of the Rue Port-Mahon, detained her for another moment.
ENGLISH   Madame Marty now had the animated nervous face of a child after drinking pure wine.
FRENCH   C\'étaient des hurlements, que des gifles durent suivre, car on entendit des poussées, des chaises abattues, toute une lutte, où revenaient les cris de la rivière:  -- À l\'eau, les calicots!  -- Les caboulots, à l\'eau! à l\'eau!  Et, lorsque la grosse voix du cabaretier eut calmé la bataille, Hutin brusquement parut.
ENGLISH   Denise affected to be joking, though all the while producing solid arguments.
FRENCH    1.B.
ENGLISH   Madame de Boves, who was listening, fancied herself between a couple of gendarmes, with her forty-five years, her luxury, and her husband\'s high position; however, she felt no remorse, but reflected that she ought to have slipped the lace up her sleeve.
FRENCH   Les moindres bruits ébranlaient la vieille masure collée au flanc du colosse: elle battait dans ce pouls énorme.
ENGLISH   It\'s a stupid affair; I made a bet and lost.
ENGLISH   As they\'ve got the money, they are naturally the strongest.\"  Just then, Denise, still hoping that Geneviève had not overheard Colomban, was saying to her: \"He loves you.
ENGLISH   Quite a little world abode there, amidst the sonorous life of the high metallic naves.
ENGLISH   \"Have you got a sample?\" he asked.
FRENCH   Après toi, on n\'en fera plus...
FRENCH   À l\'intérieur, sous le flamboiement des becs de gaz, qui, brûlant dans le crépuscule, avaient éclairé les secousses suprêmes de la vente, c\'était comme un champ de bataille encore chaud du massacre des tissus.
ENGLISH    One day he quite lost patience.
FRENCH   La brusque tendresse de Mme Aurélie l\'avait beaucoup aidée, dans cette ingrate besogne de se concilier les coeurs; on racontait tout bas que la première était la complaisante de Mouret, qu\'elle lui rendait des services délicats; et elle prenait si chaudement la jeune fille sous sa protection, qu\'on devait en effet la lui recommander, d\'une façon spéciale.
FRENCH    -- Ne m\'en parle pas! s\'écria Mme Bourdelais.
FRENCH   Il s\'était retenu de le gifler.
ENGLISH   Favier did not join him in these pleasure parties.
FRENCH   Tâche donc d\'en désirer une et de la tenir enfin: cela paye en une minute toutes les misères.
FRENCH    Et, comme ils étaient arrivés devant les confections, il entra.
ENGLISH    \"I\'ve been very good to you, mademoiselle,\" continued he, making a fresh effort.
ENGLISH   Doubtless she understood that Mouret had simply made use of her to get at the baron; but she vowed that she would render him mad with passion, he whose hurried style of love-making was instinct with the facile charm of a song thrown to the four winds of heaven.
ENGLISH   She set up a low cry; the pain she felt at her wrists restored her courage.
ENGLISH   \"Give me ten francs, or I\'m a lost man.\"  With his flowing locks and handsome girlish face the young rascal looked so comical, whilst launching out this melodramatic phrase, that she could have smiled had it not been for the anguish which his application for money caused her.
ENGLISH   Vallagnosc, who was finishing his walk through the departments, displayed more surprise than admiration; for, after all, thought he, with his pessimist nonchalance, it was nothing more than an immense collection of drapery.
ENGLISH   In short, he persuaded her to buy the house on the left, then the one on the right; and he himself, on becoming his own master, bought two others; so that the establishment has kept on growing and growing to such a point that it now threatens to swallow us all up!\"  He was addressing Denise, but was in reality speaking for himself, feeling a feverish longing to recapitulate this story which continually haunted him.
ENGLISH   The ladies separated, crossing the crowded departments for the last time.
FRENCH   Et il avait le visage si bouleversé, qu\'elle ne la retira pas.
FRENCH   Tu connais mes idées: je croirais commettre une vilaine action, si je passais, diminué, à mes enfants ce dépôt de famille; et c\'est pourquoi j\'ai toujours reculé ton mariage avec Geneviève...
FRENCH   Ce fut, pour lui, une révélation très désagréable.
ENGLISH   Denise had placed Pépé near her to see that he ate properly; but the dark close room made her feel uncomfortable.
FRENCH   En faisant le tour des rayons, il venait de les trouver vides, et la possibilité d\'une défaite s\'était brusquement dressée, dans sa foi entêtée à la fortune.
ENGLISH   From the first day a crowd of customers flocked in.
ENGLISH    \"Possibly,\" replied he, \"although the youngster proves nothing.
FRENCH   Tiens! il a piqué une tête comme ça.
FRENCH    -- Passez le pain à Deloche, cria un farceur.
FRENCH   Des commérages couraient, des aventures égayaient ces demoiselles pendant huit jours.
FRENCH   On avait quarante-huit heures, il s\'agissait de déménager une partie des magasins.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! tu es bien libre de soutenir ces grandes chabraques de maisons...
FRENCH   Enfin, ça le regarde.
FRENCH   On se perd, on fait des bêtises.
ENGLISH   The whole place was illuminated by them.
FRENCH   Les clientes, qui lui reprochaient sa boutique sombre, reviendraient certainement, quand elles la verraient flamber, toute neuve.
FRENCH   Dites-lui que je ferai mon possible pour obtenir cette faveur de M.
FRENCH   Je ne suis pas une Clara, qu\'on lâche le lendemain.
ENGLISH   He had a terrible way of saying: \"Go and be paid!\" which fell on the poor devil he had singled out like a blow from an axe.
FRENCH   Elle, prise de cruauté, cédait à un emportement dont elle n\'avait pas conscience.
ENGLISH    \"Have you any capes in hand-made point?\" she at last inquired; \"show me some, please.\"  The salesman, whom she had kept there for twenty minutes, dared not resist, for she appeared so aristocratic, with her imposing air and princess\'s voice.
ENGLISH   Farewell, dear Denise.
FRENCH   Depuis les agrandissements du Bonheur des Dames, ces derniers se trouvaient au quatrième étage, dans les bâtiments neufs.
FRENCH    Mais où Mouret se révélait comme un maître sans rival, c\'était dans l\'aménagement intérieur des magasins.
ENGLISH    \"Look here, mademoiselle! serve these ladies who are waiting.\"  Thereupon he quickly slipped Madame Marty\'s purchases into her arms, tired as he was of carrying them about.
ENGLISH   However, her advice had no effect whatever upon Denise.
FRENCH    Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.
ENGLISH   You may say what you like, one is horribly rigged out in the big shops.
ENGLISH   \"This lace was placed on me, I swear it before Heaven.\"  She was now shedding tears of rage, and fell on a chair, suffocating.
FRENCH   Elle devina le brancard qu\'on apportait, le flot de curieux qui n\'avaient pas lâché l\'accident.
FRENCH   C\'était un des services les plus compliqués et les plus considérables de la maison: on y vivait dans un coup de fièvre perpétuel, car il fallait réglementairement que les commandes du matin fussent toutes expédiées le soir.
FRENCH   Aussi, avant de se mettre à signer les traites posées sur son buvard, adressa-t-il au portrait un sourire d\'homme heureux.
FRENCH   federal laws and your state\'s laws.
FRENCH   Le baron Hartmann, selon sa promesse, avait enlevé l\'affaire, dans la dernière réunion générale du Crédit Immobilier.
ENGLISH   \"Would you believe it!\" he exclaimed, \"they now say that the house is not solid; they pretend that the foundations must be strengthened.
FRENCH   Mais, dimanche, je vous attends, vous resterez l\'après-midi avec moi.
FRENCH   Peu à peu, Mouret s\'échauffait, trouvait une émotion éloquente pour se défendre contre la haine de ses victimes involontaires, la clameur des petites boutiques moribondes, qu\'il entendait monter autour de lui.
ENGLISH   And yet she, so spare and frail, resisted courageously, whilst a great many other saleswomen, attacked by special maladies, were obliged to quit the business.
FRENCH   La seconde, Mme Frédéric, qui, dans sa rigidité maussade de veuve, se plaisait aux idées de désastre, jurait en phrases brèves, que la journée était perdue: on ne verrait pas quatre chats, on pouvait fermer les armoires et s\'en aller; prédiction qui assombrissait la face plate de Marguerite, très âpre au gain, tandis que Clara, avec ses allures de cheval échappé, rêvait déjà d\'une partie au bois de Verrières, si la maison croulait.
ENGLISH   Wasn\'t the second-hand a good comrade? Her affairs did not concern them.
ENGLISH   What pretty work! It\'s the monogram that must have increased the price of the mounting like that.\"  Madame de Boves had just turned forty.
FRENCH   Tout cela à cause de cette Denise!  -- Mesdemoiselles, pas de vilains mots, tenez-vous! disait Mme Aurélie d\'un air grave, au milieu des colères déchaînées de son petit peuple.
ENGLISH    Denise frequently questioned herself in this way.
FRENCH   Hein? superbe!  Elles se séparèrent en se pâmant, au milieu de l\'encombrement produit par la vente des entre-deux et des petites garnitures à bas prix.
FRENCH   Ne vous dérangez pas...
FRENCH   Mais, à la soie surtout, les clientes s\'étaient ruées en masse; là, elles avaient fait place nette; on y passait librement, le hall restait nu, tout le colossal approvisionnement du Paris-Bonheur venait d\'être déchiqueté, balayé, comme sous un vol de sauterelles dévorantes.
FRENCH   En sortant du magasin, disait-il, les clientes devaient avoir mal aux yeux.
ENGLISH    \"When you get upstairs turn to the left,\" he added.
FRENCH   Vous voyez, nous sommes venus, mon oncle.
ENGLISH   Her expenses were regulated; a hundred francs a month would enable her to pay Pépé\'s board and lodging, assist Jean, who did not earn a sou, and procure some clothes and linen for herself.
ENGLISH   For my part I should be only too pleased.\" Then, as a lady came up, he added in a lower tone: \"Look out! Here\'s one for you.\"  It was a lady with a blotchy face, wearing a yellow bonnet, and a red dress.
FRENCH   Liénard, dans le but d\'épargner ses bras, ce qui était son unique souci, manoeuvra pour lui faire prendre une des étoffes déjà dépliées sur le comptoir.
FRENCH    Comme les trois dames s\'éloignaient ensemble, et que Mme Marty revenait avec remords sur la table à ouvrage dont elle n\'avait aucun besoin, Mme Guibal lui dit de sa voix tranquille:  -- Eh bien! vous la rendrez...
ENGLISH   But what a child you are to grieve like this! What a misfortune it is to be so sensitive! Of course, what is happening to you happens to every one; they are making you pay your footing.\"  Then carried away by her good heart she caught hold of Denise\'s hands and kissed her.
ENGLISH   This increased her timidity; and she no longer had courage to follow them, but resolved to wait till they had entered, blushing at the mere idea of being elbowed at the door by all these men.
ENGLISH    At the same moment Mouret was crossing the premises below, seeking to forget his thoughts by visiting the works once more.
FRENCH   Et la victoire lui resta, le vieillard désespéré répéta que l\'art était fichu, qu\'il en était réduit à tailler ses manches pour le plaisir, sans espoir de les vendre.
ENGLISH   At last she rose from her chair.
FRENCH   À droite et à gauche, au fond des caveaux obscurs, les marchandises des réserves entassaient des ombres derrière les palissades.
ENGLISH   The fan once more went the round of the ladies, amidst various remarks and exclamations.
FRENCH   Et elle disait non, justement parce qu\'elle l\'aimait, sans expliquer cela.
FRENCH   Quant a Pépé, il serait à merveille chez Mme Gras, une vieille dame qui habitait un grand rez-de-chaussée, rue des Orties, où elle prenait en pension complète des enfants jeunes, moyennant quarante francs par mois.
FRENCH   On ne peut pas interrompre tes études.
FRENCH   Ne vous reculez donc pas!...
ENGLISH   Isn\'t it delicious? One franc ninety centimes the metre.\"  The lace passed from hand to hand.
ENGLISH    \"Pull the waist down in front,\" said Madame Aurélie to Denise.
ENGLISH    Down below, as she was entering her department, a quarrel burst out and she heard Clara exclaim in a shrill voice:  \"Madame, I came in before her.\"  \"It isn\'t true,\" replied Marguerite.
FRENCH   Attendez, je vais mieux, je ne pleure plus.
ENGLISH   The latter hastily took him into his office, where he soon put him at rest as to the possible consequences.
ENGLISH    \"Ah!\" murmured Bouthemont, anxiously.
FRENCH   Les chiffres sont là: quarante francs pour le petit, des pièces de cent sous de temps à autre au grand; et vous ensuite, vous qui ne pouvez toujours aller mise comme une pauvresse, avec des souliers dont ces demoiselles plaisantent; oui, parfaitement, vos souliers vous font du tort...
FRENCH   Nous seuls décidons de la marque.
FRENCH    YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.
ENGLISH    \"That won\'t do! You know there\'s a confessional box at your place for the salesmen who venture to look at the young ladies there.
FRENCH   Le commerce est le commerce, il n\'y a pas à sortir de là...
FRENCH   Nous n\'en parlerons plus, car il est inutile qu\'ils nous fâchent encore.
FRENCH   Lentement, il marchait parmi ces richesses jetées sans ordre, entassées à l\'état brut.
FRENCH   Puis, on a le choix.
FRENCH   Tant pis pour ceux qui ne savaient pas se tailler leur part!  Maintenant, les rayons ne causaient plus d\'autre chose.
FRENCH   D\'autant plus que la chère dame n\'est guère farouche, à ce qu\'on raconte.
ENGLISH   But beneath their art in dress, and the manners and phrases they had learnt by rote, there was often only a false, superficial education, the fruit of reading worthless papers, attending cheap theatres and music-halls, and picking up all the current stupidities of Paris.
FRENCH   Des vendeurs nonchalants se tenaient debout, quelques rares clientes suivaient les galeries, traversaient le hall, de ce pas abandonné des femmes que le soleil tourmente.
ENGLISH   Downstairs, the young woman found the street full of people, for the small traders of the neighbourhood were anxious to give the Baudus a mark of sympathy, and in their eagerness there was a desire for a demonstration against that Ladies\' Paradise, which they accused of having caused Geneviève\'s slow agony.
FRENCH   Et, le lendemain, la même journée recommençait, ces journées si actives, si pleines d\'un colossal labeur, que l\'ombre fluette d\'une enfant suffisait à ravager d\'angoisse.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! bonjour! répondit celle-ci, qui serra les mains à ces dames.
ENGLISH   The women, pale with desire, bent over as if to look at themselves in a mirror.
ENGLISH   The principals now discovered a series of extraordinary robberies; goods taken away by girls who went into the luxurious lavatories, situated near the refreshment bar and surrounded by evergreen plants, to hide them under their skirts; purchases which a salesman neglected to call out at a pay-desk, when he accompanied a customer there and the price of which he divided with the cashier; and even false \"returns,\" articles which employees said had been brought back in order that they might pocket the refunded money; without mentioning the common robberies of things which the salesmen took away under their coats in the evening, sometimes rolled round their bodies, and sometimes even hung down their legs.
FRENCH   Seulement, le second avait vu Hutin se relever, derrière le comptoir.
FRENCH   Faites le déplié.
ENGLISH    \"Haven\'t you bought the former Hôtel Duvillard, that old building next to my place?\" he suddenly inquired.
FRENCH   L\'oncle, tout en affectant de respecter les idées de Denise, en arrivait à l\'endoctriner.
FRENCH   C\'était l\'heure attendrie du crépuscule, cette minute de discrète volupté, dans les appartements parisiens, entre la clarté de la rue qui se meurt et les lampes qu\'on allume encore à l\'office.
FRENCH   Jusqu\'à présent, nous n\'avons qu\'à nous louer de vous.
ENGLISH   I come from Chartres.
ENGLISH   furniture upholstered in flowered brocatel, its gilded bronzes and large green plants, had a pleasant, cozy, feminine aspect, albeit the ceiling was so lofty; and through the two windows could be seen the chestnut trees of the Tuileries Gardens, whose leaves were blowing about in the October wind.
ENGLISH   \"You are the most capable, the most trustworthy.
FRENCH    -- Vous voilà, dit Baudu.
FRENCH   Mais, quand j\'en tiens une, je la tiens que diable! et ça ne rate pas toujours, et je ne donne ma part à personne, je t\'assure...
ENGLISH   I wanted to follow the example of those brigands; so much the better if I\'m ruined by it!\"  The month of July proved very warm, and Denise suffered greatly in her tiny room under the roof.
ENGLISH   Then, after making personal inquiries, all the while in a nervous torment which he could not conceal, he again lost his temper.
FRENCH   C\'était un débordement d\'étalages, le Bonheur des Dames sautait aux yeux du monde entier, envahissait les murailles, les journaux, jusqu\'aux rideaux des théâtres.
FRENCH   Clara était un scandale, avait trois entreteneurs, disait-on, sans compter la queue d\'amants de hasard, qu\'elle traînait derrière elle; et, si elle ne quittait pas le magasin, où elle travaillait le moins possible, dans le dédain d\'un argent gagné plus agréablement ailleurs, c\'était pour se couvrir aux yeux de sa famille; car elle avait la continuelle terreur du père Prunaire, qui menaçait de tomber à Paris lui casser les bras et les jambes à coups de sabot.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! as for that fellow, we must settle his hash,\" said Hutin, who took advantage of the slightest incidents to stir up the salesmen against the man whose place he coveted.
FRENCH    -- Qu\'avez-vous? demanda son amie.
ENGLISH   Yes, it was the needful meed of blood, every revolution required martyrs, each step forward is taken over the bodies of the dead.
ENGLISH   I have spoken to him myself about it; he was perfectly well aware that my poor cousin was suffering on his account, and yet you see that did not prevent him from leaving.
ENGLISH   Her eyes glistened with gratitude; she followed him with a lingering look, whilst he began elbowing his way as fast as possible towards his department.
FRENCH    -- Monsieur Deloche, vous rentrez avec nous, dit-elle.
FRENCH   Comme les autres chefs de comptoir, celui-ci touchait, outre ses trois mille francs d\'appointements fixes, un tant pour cent sur la vente.
FRENCH   Je me suis entendu avec plusieurs de mes confrères de Lyon, je vous apporte une offre exceptionnelle, une soie noire, une faille, que vous pourrez vendre à cinq francs cinquante...
ENGLISH   period, had only three front windows up above, square and shutterless windows simply provided with handrails supported by two iron bars placed crosswise.
FRENCH   On craignait même l\'apoplexie pour le bimbelotier, car il ne dérageait pas, en voyant le Bonheur afficher les porte-monnaie à trente pour cent de rabais.
ENGLISH    For a moment he was astonished.
ENGLISH   At six o\'clock the tables were already crowded, yet the excursionists still hurried in, looking for vacant corners; and the waiters continued bringing in more chairs and forms, putting the plates closer and closer together and crowding the people up.
FRENCH    À présent, le matin et le soir, lorsque les mille employés entraient et sortaient, ils s\'allongeaient en une queue si longue sur la place Gaillon, que le monde s\'arrêtait pour les regarder, comme on regarde défiler un régiment.
FRENCH   Sa bonne grâce à souffrir, l\'entêtement de sa vaillance la maintenaient souriante et droite, lorsqu\'elle défaillait, à bout de forces, épuisée par un travail auquel des hommes auraient succombé.
FRENCH   Cependant, tandis que Jean blêmissait, Denise avait serré contre sa poitrine Pépé terrifié.
FRENCH   Sa chambre était son unique refuge, le seul endroit où elle s\'abandonnait encore à des crises de larmes, lorsqu\'elle avait trop souffert durant le jour.
FRENCH   Je vous ai crue jalouse et j\'ai sacrifié mes plaisirs.
ENGLISH   A hundred millions! just fancy! a hundred millions!\"  Denise had nothing to say in reply.
ENGLISH   Pépé and Jean, who had never left her side, were living with strangers; she was parted from everything, and the big tears which she strove to keep back made the street dance before her in a sort of fog.
FRENCH   Seulement, elle perdait la tête, au point de ne pas comprendre les explications les plus claires; et les commis auxquels elle demandait en balbutiant Mme Aurélie, avaient beau lui indiquer l\'escalier de l\'entresol, elle remerciait, puis elle tournait à gauche, si on lui avait dit de tourner à droite; de sorte que, depuis dix minutes, elle battait le rez-de-chaussée, allant de rayon en rayon, au milieu de la curiosité méchante et de l\'indifférence maussade des vendeurs.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! j\'aime mieux m\'étourdir...
ENGLISH   From first to last, however, this large family had cost a deal of money, and Baudu had made things worse by buying a great lumbering country house, at Rambouillet, near his wife\'s father\'s place.
FRENCH    Et sa voix, qui se ralentissait, eut un léger tremblement.
FRENCH   En attendant, il traitait la jeune fille de puissance à puissance, car il ne la dédaignait plus, il la sentait assez forte pour le culbuter lui-même, malgré ses dix ans de service, s\'il perdait la partie.
ENGLISH   When the two saleswomen had lunched in a small room, adjoining the larger one where the women were served much more comfortably, Pauline had to assist Denise downstairs again as her sprain was getting more painful.
ENGLISH   The young ladies of her department were especially friendly with the salesmen who served the lace, but their intimacy never seemed to go any further than whispered banter.
ENGLISH    And, nervously, delighted at having something to talk about, he gave a number of details, related cases, and classified the delinquents.
FRENCH   Les pancartes blanches n\'étaient plus que des lignes minces, les piles de rubans s\'écrasaient, le promontoire de flanelle coupait la galerie d\'un mur étroit; tandis que les tapis et les soies brodées qui pavoisaient les balustrades, pendaient à ses pieds ainsi que des bannières de procession, accrochées sous le jubé d\'une église.
FRENCH   Denise n\'avait pas d\'amie.
ENGLISH   They were astonished, never thinking it would turn out like that, and with that fellow above all.
ENGLISH   As for papa, he is too much worried, and does not know the pain he is causing me by postponing the marriage.
FRENCH   C\'était Mme Marty, que sa crise de dépense emportait au travers des magasins.
ENGLISH   Behind Marguerite three saleswomen were emptying the cupboards, classifying the articles, and giving them to her in bundles; and, when she had called them out, she threw them on the table, where they were gradually accumulating in huge piles.
FRENCH   C\'était une jalousie maussade des vendeuses contre les clientes bien mises, les dames dont elles s\'efforçaient de copier les allures, et une jalousie encore plus aigre des clientes mises pauvrement, des petites bourgeoises contre les vendeuses, ces filles vêtues de soie, dont elles voulaient obtenir une humilité de servante, pour un achat de dix sous.
ENGLISH   His wife spent everything he earned.
ENGLISH   She had listened with all her soul, with an intense passion which had raised her in the bed.
FRENCH    Un grand frisson secouait Mme Robineau.
ENGLISH   He has invited her to dinner for this evening.\"  Deloche turned very pale.
ENGLISH   However, the inspector on duty had orders to be indulgent.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle immediately took her on one side, made her confess, and submitted the question of her dismissal to the board, under the pretext that she was in need of country air.
ENGLISH   \"But pray consider the consequences of such a thing.
ENGLISH   However, the latter stood firm, and it was now an hourly battle.
ENGLISH   After him, had come a post-office clerk.
FRENCH   Le matin encore, chaque rayon avait délégué un vendeur, Mignot et Liénard s\'étaient chargés de parler au nom de leurs camarades.
FRENCH    -- Moi, interrompait Mme Bourdelais, j\'ai voulu du velours, oh! une occasion!  Mme Marty demandait:  -- Hein? combien la soie?  Puis, toutes les voix repartirent ensemble.
FRENCH   Comme elle roulait sa tête malade sur ses bras repliés, une épingle se défit, les cheveux coulèrent dans son cou, l\'ensevelirent de leurs ténèbres.
FRENCH   Notre effort unique est de nous débarrasser très vite de la marchandise achetée, pour la remplacer par d\'autre, ce qui fait rendre au capital autant de fois son intérêt.
FRENCH   Pourtant, il voulait bien accepter la faute, s\'il s\'agissait de le tirer d\'un mauvais pas.
FRENCH   Sa femme, inquiète, le regardait d\'un air tendre.
FRENCH   Mais que ça ne vous dérange pas, il ne viendra personne.
FRENCH   Qui donc, des amants?  -- Hutin, assure-t-on, et encore un vendeur des dentelles, Deloche, ce grand garçon bête...
ENGLISH   Then we who sometimes employ piece-workers with ten or fifteen looms of their own are better able to control our output, whereas the big manufacturers are obliged to have continual outlets, the quickest and most extensive possible.
FRENCH   S\'il travaille autant qu\'il mange, ça fera un rude homme...
ENGLISH   And it was like a resurrection, he discovered in Denise the good sense, the mental equilibrium of her whom he had lost, even down to her gentle voice, sparing of useless words.
FRENCH   Il était sur le trottoir, et il a glissé sous les roues d\'un omnibus...
ENGLISH   Besides, fresh departments were always springing up, they had tried two new ones in December, in order to fill up the empty spaces caused by the dead winter season--a book department and a toy department, which would certainly expand and sweep away certain shops in the neighbourhood.
FRENCH   Ah! je ne suis pas grosse, n\'est-ce pas? J\'étais plus forte, et tout s\'en est allé...
ENGLISH   But he was not angry.
ENGLISH   At present she could breathe freely in the freshness of the starry night.
ENGLISH   As Hutin and Favier slowly withdrew, they saw Denise coming down.
FRENCH    -- Alors, pourquoi? demanda simplement Mouret.
FRENCH   Puis, il s\'était dit qu\'elle devait être ambitieuse, il lui avait promis de la nommer première, dès qu\'un rayon serait vacant.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle, who had rejoined him, seemed less anxious, though he was still examining him with stealthy glances.
ENGLISH   They were talking about dress, and Madame de Boves was describing a gown she had seen at a ball.
ENGLISH   You are no longer at Valognes; study our Parisian young ladies.
FRENCH   Laissez-la toujours porter chez vous.
ENGLISH   \"After all those stories! She must still be weeping over the fire at The Four Seasons.\"  However, it was indeed Henriette.
FRENCH   Non, on se réunissait une vingtaine, on fondait un cercle.
ENGLISH    One day a baroness had beamed on him, he would relate, and on another occasion he had fascinated the wife of an eminent architect.
FRENCH    -- À l\'eau, les caboulots!  -- Les calicots, à l\'eau, à l\'eau!  Le soir, on retourna au restaurant de l\'île.
ENGLISH   It seemed as if all the seductions of the shop converged to this supreme temptation, this secluded corner of perdition where the strongest must succumb.
ENGLISH   But when the footman had closed the door, he quickly caught hold of the young woman\'s hand, and tenderly kissed it.
FRENCH   Demandez à ma tante.
FRENCH    Il se redressa.
ENGLISH   In the glances that were exchanged between them, Denise displayed such melancholy dignity, such frank innocence, that Henriette felt quite uncomfortable.
FRENCH   Son ignorance de ce qui se passait là-dedans, les allées et venues de Jouve et des deux vendeuses, la bouleversaient, évoquaient les gendarmes, la cour d\'assises, la prison.
FRENCH   Il remonta un autre jour, il prit l\'habitude de la venir voir.
ENGLISH   How much longer are they going to make a fool of me?\"  The thought that his money spent on paint and whitewash had brought the fruiterer a profit exasperated him.
FRENCH   Au rez-de-chaussée, pour ne pas tuer les étoffes des vitrines, la décoration restait sobre: un soubassement en marbre vert de mer; les piles d\'angle et les piliers d\'appui recouverts de marbre noir, dont la sévérité s\'éclairait de cartouches dorés; et le reste en glaces sans tain, dans les châssis de fer, rien que des glaces qui semblaient ouvrir les profondeurs des galeries et des halls au plein jour de la rue.
FRENCH   Donne vite les quinze francs, ou nous sommes fichus, aussi vrai que le soleil nous éclaire!  Alors, Denise fut saisie d\'un grand trouble.
ENGLISH   Naturally he was in consternation at this \"return,\" which deprived him of his commission, and so did his best to embarrass his customer, suspecting some queer adventure, no doubt a ball given with these curtains, bought at The Ladies\' Paradise, and then returned, to avoid the cost of hire at an upholsterer\'s.
ENGLISH   Favier stood there with his face to the opening, gazing into the kitchen with its giant appliances.
FRENCH   Cette émotion, où elle ne pouvait lire, pesait de plus en plus sur son coeur, comme un poids trop lourd.
ENGLISH   It would be a crime not to do so.\"  \"How you go ahead, my dear sir!\" Baron Hartmann contented himself with replying.
FRENCH   Elle se trouvait toujours rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin; mais on avait dû l\'élargir, elle avait maintenant un lit de fleuve, où le continuel flot des marchandises roulait avec la voix haute des grandes eaux; c\'étaient des arrivages du monde entier, des files de camions venus de toutes les gares, un déchargement sans arrêt, un ruissellement de caisses et de ballots coulant sous terre, bu par la maison insatiable.
FRENCH   Souvent elle devait passer la nuit, elle entretenait son mince trousseau, reprisant son linge, raccommodant ses chemises comme de la dentelle; sans compter qu\'elle avait posé des pièces à ses souliers, aussi adroitement qu\'un cordonnier aurait pu le faire.
ENGLISH   Ah! yes, that poor little girl; she wasn\'t very sharp, and had others dependent on her, it was said.
FRENCH   Mais, en parlant, elle ne quittait pas des yeux les portes du salon; et elle parut soulagée, quand Mme Bourdelais retourna vers ses enfants, afin de leur expliquer les photographies.
ENGLISH   Notwithstanding the seeming assurance with which he predicted the utter downfall of his rivals, he was in reality terrified, feeling at heart that the neighbourhood was being gradually invaded and devoured.
FRENCH    -- Vous savez, expliqua-t-elle, on fait cet hiver aux jeunes filles des robes garnies d\'une petite dentelle...
ENGLISH   Mouret, without reprimanding them, thereupon explained his scheme of giving them a little bonus for each error they might detect in the debit notes; and when he went out the clerks, quite cured of all inclination for idle laughter, set to work in earnest, hunting for errors.
FRENCH   Mais elles sont toujours occupées par des dames.
FRENCH    Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at https://pglaf.org/fundraising.
ENGLISH    \"Hallo!\" said Pauline, \"it\'s Monsieur Hutin.\"  \"Yes,\" replied Baugé, shading his face with his hand, \"I recognise his mahogany boat.
FRENCH   Mais ce n\'est pas vilain, va! au contraire, et voilà pourquoi on recommence...
FRENCH    -- Comment! vous aussi, Mignot, vous avez une cuisse, dit Favier, lorsqu\'il se fut assis à une des tables, en face de son compagnon.
ENGLISH    \"Why did you go and relate that?\" he murmured at last in a sorrowful voice.
ENGLISH    \"Dear me! each one to her taste,\" said Madame de Boves, also accepting a sandwich.
ENGLISH   And on noticing that her husband was with Madame Guibal, she quite recovered herself, and looked at them with such a dignified air that the other lady felt obliged to say: \"I was with Madame Desforges, these gentlemen just met us.\"  As it happened the other ladies came up just at that moment, accompanied by Mouret who again detained them to point out Jouve, who was still following the suspicious woman and her lady friend.
FRENCH   D\'un haussement d\'épaules, il parut déclarer qu\'il les jetterait toutes par terre, comme des sacs vides, le jour où elles l\'auraient aidé à bâtir sa fortune.
ENGLISH   He likes it like that.
ENGLISH   The matter had to be settled at once, the salesmen\'s attitude appearing so menacing that the head of the department had sent Robineau out to match some goods at the dépôts of manufacturers in order to give the authorities an opportunity to come to a decision.
ENGLISH   Did he know why she was crossing the silk department, when she could not herself have explained what had impelled her to make such a _détour_?  Hutin, moreover, did not seem to be at all aware of the young girl\'s grateful looks.
FRENCH   Mme Boutarel dut reparaître pendant que la foule discutait et riait.
FRENCH    Puis, il passait au service de la réception, qui occupait à cette heure la partie des sous-sols en bordure sur la rue Monsigny.
FRENCH   Bourras seul niait les faits, refusait de comprendre, superbe et stupide comme une borne.
FRENCH   Vivez donc heureuse, vous qui êtes jeune, et n\'empêchez pas les vieux de partir avec leurs idées.
ENGLISH   Then she murmured in a trembling voice: \"But there are saleswomen in the department who are much my seniors, sir.\"  \"What does that matter?\" he resumed.
FRENCH   La situation de M.
FRENCH   Un homme était allé au poste de police demander un brancard.
FRENCH   La direction avait trouvé cela plus décent.
FRENCH   Vous verrez l\'écrasement, lundi prochain!  Et, à propos de cette mise en vente qu\'on préparait dans tous les comptoirs, il interrogea de nouveau Robineau, il lui donna des ordres.
FRENCH   Toutes lui appartenaient, étaient sa chose, et il n\'était à aucune.
FRENCH   Chacun a ses idées, heureusement.
ENGLISH   Never before had he loved like this, found such a powerful charm in suffering.
ENGLISH   But you don\'t hope to keep on increasing in this way, do you?\"  \"Why not?\" asked Mouret, ingenuously.
ENGLISH   \"Never mind, I love you all the same.\"  They reached the station of the Vincennes line just in time for a train.
FRENCH   On longeait avec peine les galeries du rez-de-chaussée, obstruées par la débandade des chaises; il fallait enjamber, à la ganterie, une barricade de cartons, entassés autour de Mignot; aux lainages, on ne passait plus du tout, Liénard sommeillait au-dessus d\'une mer de pièces, où des piles restées debout, à moitié détruites, semblaient des maisons dont un fleuve débordé charrie les ruines; et, plus loin, le blanc avait neigé à terre, on butait contre des banquises de serviettes, on marchait sur les flocons légers des mouchoirs.
FRENCH   Comme tous les soirs, Lhomme, premier caissier de la vente, venait de centraliser les recettes particulières de chaque caisse; après les avoir additionnées, il affichait la recette totale, en embrochant dans sa pique de fer la feuille où elle était inscrite; et il montait ensuite cette recette à la caisse centrale, dans un portefeuille et dans des sacs, selon la nature du numéraire.
ENGLISH   He was once more mastered by it.
FRENCH   La salle à manger des chefs de comptoir et des seconds se trouvait justement en face.
ENGLISH   Despite her jealous rancour, she also was buying, and he felt himself to be the master once more, having them at his feet, beneath the dazzle of the electric light, like a drove of cattle from which he had drawn his fortune.
FRENCH   Bouthemont, très pâle, dut encore le remercier.
FRENCH   Celle-ci, cependant, demeurait tout émue devant cette vente inespérée qui se présentait.
FRENCH   C\'était Mme Aurélie, très forte, sanglée dans sa robe de soie noire, dont le corsage, tendu sur la rondeur massive des épaules et de la gorge, luisait comme une armure.
ENGLISH   She then tried to obtain work elsewhere; but in her ignorance of Paris she did not know where to apply, and often accepted most ungrateful tasks, sometimes not even getting paid.
ENGLISH    \"Why don\'t you set up on your own account?\" she asked all at once, drawing her hands away.
ENGLISH    At the trousseau department there was a wonderful display of pleating, embroidery, valenciennes, percale and Cambric; and then followed another room devoted to baby-linen, where the voluptuous whiteness of woman\'s clothing developed into the chaste whiteness of infancy--an innocence, a joy, the young wife become a mother, amidst flannel coifs, chemises and caps like dolls\' things, christening gowns, cashmere pelisses, indeed all the white down of birth, like a fine shower of white feathers.
ENGLISH    \"Dear madame,\" said she to Henriette, \"you will excuse me bringing my bag.
FRENCH    Le récit de cette querelle, grossi, dénaturé, égayait déjà le magasin, lorsque l\'histoire de la lettre de Mouret circula.
ENGLISH   It\'s impossible to stay here.\"  Since she had entered, inspector Jouve, standing near the door, had not taken his eyes off her; and when she turned round she encountered his gaze.
FRENCH   Dans un coin de la table, contre le mur, Deloche mangeait silencieusement.
ENGLISH   You heard a loud noise as of jaws working.
FRENCH   On avait vu Albert disparaître dans le bureau des inspecteurs.
ENGLISH   She seemed of uncertain age, her five-and-thirty years sometimes appearing equal to thirty, and sometimes to forty, according to the intensity of the nervous fever which so often agitated her.
FRENCH    -- Il faut s\'attendre à tout, murmura-t-il enfin.
ENGLISH   Then, turning round, he added in a lower tone, \"One fellow has cut himself.
FRENCH   Cette vie de chien battu rendait mauvaises les meilleures; et le triste défilé commençait: toutes mangées par le métier avant quarante ans, disparaissant, tombant à l\'inconnu, beaucoup mortes à la peine, phtisiques ou anémiques, de fatigue et de mauvais air, quelques-unes roulées au trottoir, les plus heureuses mariées, enterrées au fond d\'une petite boutique de province.
FRENCH   Enfin, un jour où il le vit plus calme, il osa dire, d\'une voix particulière:  -- Il vaut mieux pour tout le monde qu\'elle soit partie.
FRENCH    Et, se tournant vers Octave, elle ajouta:  -- M.
FRENCH   Baugé m\'épouse, parce que c\'est Baugé.
FRENCH   Vous avez raison, il faut tenter le coup.
FRENCH   Personne ne viendra.
FRENCH   Bouthemont vous demande du foulard, les dessins les plus clairs.
FRENCH   Deloche, revenu devant le comptoir avec les berthes, la regardait emmener, bouche béante: comment? celle-là aussi! cette dame si noble! c\'était à les fouiller toutes! Et Blanche, qu\'on laissait libre, suivait de loin sa mère, s\'attardait au milieu de la houle des épaules, livide, partagée entre le devoir de ne pas l\'abandonner et la terreur d\'être gardée avec elle.
ENGLISH   At first, chaffed by Clara, he had grown very dissipated; then, yielding to the wild desires which at times master sly, chaste men, he had become her obedient slave; and one Monday instead of returning to the shop had sent a farewell letter to Baudu, written in the studied terms of one who is about to commit suicide.
FRENCH    Le lendemain, à six heures, au petit jour, Geneviève expirait, après quatre heures d\'un râle affreux.
FRENCH   Puis, Mme Aurélie elle-même venait d\'être appelée; et elle, la tête haute sous l\'affront, avait la bouffissure grasse et blême d\'un masque de cire.
ENGLISH   And he had also authorized one of his shopmen to exhibit on a small table there some Chinese and Japanese curiosities, low-priced knick-knacks which customers eagerly snatched up.
ENGLISH   That\'s what kills the small Houses.\"  He was passing through a period of discouragement.
FRENCH   Mais, sans doute, je m\'amuse, et même lorsque les choses craquent, parce qu\'alors je suis furieux de les entendre craquer.
ENGLISH   Sent to Paris by his father, who kept a draper\'s shop in his native town, he had absolutely refused to return home when the old fellow, thinking that he ought to know enough to succeed him in his business, had summoned him to do so; and from that moment a rivalry had sprung up between father and son, the former, absorbed in his little country business and shocked to see a simple shopman earning three times as much as he did himself, and the latter joking at the old man\'s humdrum routine, chinking his money, and throwing the whole house into confusion at every flying visit he paid.
ENGLISH    However, Madame Aurélie herself, had just put the mantle on Madame Marty, and they all exclaimed: \"Oh! how nice! delightful!\" It at once looked quite different.
FRENCH   Eh bien! lorsque je dis non, ne mettez pas votre nez là-dedans.
FRENCH   Des charpentes métalliques se dressaient, des échelles, des ponts, qui découpaient leur dentelle dans le bleu de l\'air; tandis que la cheminée des cuisines faisait une grosse fumée de fabrique, et que le grand réservoir carré, tenu en plein ciel sur des piliers de fonte, prenait un étrange profil de construction barbare, haussée à cette place par l\'orgueil d\'un homme.
FRENCH   Lui, espérait avoir la place de second, si l\'autre obtenait celle de chef de comptoir.
FRENCH    -- Nous avons d\'autres étoffes étonnantes de bon marché et de richesse, continuait Mouret de sa voix chantante.
FRENCH    -- C\'est donc ça que les femmes ont ici des yeux si drôles! murmurait Vallagnosc.
FRENCH    Baudu parut frappé de stupéfaction.
ENGLISH   But what surprised her above all, in the weariness of her eyes blinded by the brilliant medley of colours, was, on lowering their lids, to realize the presence of the crowd more keenly than ever, by its dull roar like that of the rising tide, and the human warmth that it exhaled.
ENGLISH   Towards one o\'clock there was a crowd waiting to enter; the street was blocked as in a time of riot.
ENGLISH   And, you see, I\'m ready to sacrifice everything rather than yield.\"  Thereupon he would brandish his knife, and his white hair would blow about in a storm of anger.
ENGLISH   So much the better for the public, that\'s all!\"  Robineau was not angry, but had become grave, and had fixed his eyes on the table-cloth.
ENGLISH    However, he still held her hand and inquired: \"Will he come?\"  \"Certainly,\" she replied: \"I have his promise.\"  They both referred to Baron Hartmann, the director of the Crédit Immobilier.
ENGLISH    \"Let Joseph alone,\" Bourdoncle exclaimed at last, \"and don\'t say any more.
ENGLISH    And it was always and ever no, in all the departments, in the galleries, the saloons, in every part of the establishment! He went from the silk to the drapery department, from the linen to the lace; he ascended to the upper floors, pausing on the hanging bridges, prolonging his inspection with a maniacal, grievous minuteness.
FRENCH   Il songeait à s\'échapper; mais il ne voulait pas que son départ eût l\'air d\'une fuite.
ENGLISH    \"Where\'s your mother? Have you lost each other? Come, tell me, you make me feel anxious.\"  Nothing in the way of a colourable fiction presented itself to her mind, and in great distress she told him everything in a low voice: \"Mamma, mamma--she has been stealing.\"  \"What! stealing?\" At last he understood.
FRENCH   Du coup, les choses se gâtèrent.
FRENCH    -- Vous aimez quelqu\'un, n\'est-ce pas? reprit-il d\'une voix tremblante.
FRENCH   Déjà Marguerite, debout devant une des caisses de l\'entresol, appelait les divers achats de Mme Marty, qui paya et qui donna l\'ordre de porter le paquet dans sa voiture.
FRENCH   Entre deux articles appelés, on ne causait que d\'argent.
ENGLISH    \"I saw your husband crossing the Place Gaillon,\" murmured Denise, who had ended by entering the shop.
ENGLISH   Then, if they got up to calm their fever, and went, with bare feet, to pull back the curtains and look out of the window, they were frightened by the vision of The Ladies\' Paradise flaring in the darkness like a colossal forge, where their ruin was being forged.
ENGLISH    \"I promise you to look into the matter,\" he said in conclusion, raising his voice so that they might all hear it from one end of the passage to the other.
ENGLISH   \'Twas a fine part to play, decent and intelligent, that of yawning before other people\'s labour!  \"But yawning in other people\'s faces is my only pleasure,\" said Vallagnosc, smiling in his cold way.
ENGLISH   Desirous of sparing Pépé a needless grief, she had left him with Madame Gras, intending to fetch him in the afternoon to see his uncle and aunt.
FRENCH   Demain il faudra faire venir le médecin.
ENGLISH   A host of shopmen were engaged in measuring off this silk; above the customers\' heads you could see the pale glimmer of the unfolded pieces, as the fingers of the employees came and went along the oak yard measures hanging from brass rods; and you could hear the noise of scissors swiftly cutting the silk, as fast as it was unwound, as if indeed there were not shopmen enough to suffice for all the greedy outstretched hands of the purchasers.
FRENCH   Parfaitement! vous passerez comme un autre à la caisse, Bourdoncle!  D\'un geste, il le congédiait.
ENGLISH   \"This was a very good idea of yours.\"  \"And I thought of something else last night,\" explained Mouret.
ENGLISH   And he fancied he could again see the modest profile of the girl whom he had observed when passing through the ante-room.
FRENCH   L\'amie avait disparu.
ENGLISH   Since the commencement of the month, the provinces had been sending up their detachments; you saw nothing but queerly-dressed dames in yellow shawls, green skirts, and flaring bonnets.
ENGLISH   Then in the weak voice of a convalescent she said, \"I should like a glass of water.
FRENCH    -- Quel sale individu!...
FRENCH   Allons rejoindre Mme de Boves.
ENGLISH   That will enable us to show some fight.
FRENCH   Seulement, elle considérait que Denise lui avait volé la succession de Mme Frédéric.
ENGLISH   Just put that on your shoulders.\"  Denise, wounded to the heart, despairing of ever succeeding, had remained motionless, her hands dangling by her side.
FRENCH   Justement, Bourdoncle, à la recherche du directeur, l\'attendait depuis un instant, arrêté devant la porte close par Jouve, qui lui avait glissé un mot à l\'oreille, d\'un air grave.
ENGLISH   When Madame Aurélie returned, and found the department quiet and busy under the surveillance of the second-hand, she smiled at her amicably.
ENGLISH    \"No wonder! The downfall of that big booby Vabre was a foregone conclusion.
FRENCH    Comme Mme Desforges cherchait Mme Guibal, elle s\'exclama, en l\'apercevant avec Mme Marty.
FRENCH    -- Vous aviez donc une permission de théâtre?  -- Oui, monsieur.
ENGLISH   His daily recreation, after luncheon was to watch the feet of the passers-by spinning along the street, a continual procession of living feet in big shoes, elegant boots, and ladies\' tiny boots, without either head or body.
ENGLISH   Bouthemont, who had sat down opposite to her, was gazing at her with his handsome laughing eyes, which he was endeavouring to keep serious.
FRENCH   Du reste, les uns comme les autres, tombaient d\'accord que cette petite vendeuse avait mené l\'affaire avec la science d\'une rouée de génie, et qu\'elle jouait la partie suprême, en lui mettant ainsi le marché à la main.
FRENCH    L\'intéressé refusa d\'en convenir, d\'un geste d\'ennui.
ENGLISH   The young ladies, who were very busy, left her an important sale; but it was only Tuesday, and she must wait four days before drawing any cash.
FRENCH    Puis, remarquant que son ami semblait souffrir, il lui prit les mains, il continua:  -- Voyons, je ne veux pas te faire de la peine, mais avoue que tes diplômes n\'ont satisfait aucun de tes besoins...
FRENCH   Les jouissances rataient, il n\'y avait pas même de joie à mal faire.
ENGLISH   One always receives too many of such things.\"  \"You are fortunate, my dear, in having a gallant husband,\" answered the countess in a tone of delicate irony.
ENGLISH   He understood that he could not detain her any longer.
FRENCH   Moi qui ai fait la bêtise de prendre de la raie...
FRENCH    Et toute sa petite personne normande, aimable et grasse, jouait la bonhomie, énergiquement.
ENGLISH   As for Madame Aurélie, she remained silent and serious, promenading her Cæsarian countenance about the empty department, like a general who has responsibility whether in victory or in defeat.
FRENCH    -- Mais c\'est superbe! dit Mouret enchanté.
FRENCH   Ils achevaient le tour des comptoirs de l\'entresol, ils avaient traversé les dentelles, les châles, les fourrures, l\'ameublement, la lingerie, et ils finissaient par les confections.
FRENCH    Leurs tendresses avaient poussé dans ce rez-de-chaussée du vieux Paris.
FRENCH    Justement, Denise, espérant encore que Geneviève n\'avait pu entendre Colomban, lui disait à l\'oreille:  -- Il vous aime, soyez plus gaie.
FRENCH   Mouret, depuis ce temps, rêvait d\'avoir l\'archevêque!  Cependant, trois heures sonnaient à l\'horloge qui surmontait la porte.
ENGLISH   They now had to go to the under-linen department, to get four chemises like the half-dozen which Thérèse had bought on the Saturday.
ENGLISH   I\'m hemmed in on all sides!\" He was waving his long arms about, in a burst of fury which made his white mane stand up on end.
FRENCH   Lorsque Jean tombait au milieu de cette pauvreté, il se traitait de scélérat, avec une telle violence de désespoir, qu\'elle était obligée de mentir; souvent, elle trouvait encore le moyen de lui glisser une pièce de quarante sous, pour lui prouver qu\'elle avait des économies.
FRENCH   Les chiffres volaient, les paquets de vêtements pleuvaient dru sur les tables.
ENGLISH   His name was Hutin, his father kept a café at Yvetot, and after eighteen months\' service he had managed to become one of the principal salesmen, thanks to a natural flexibility of character and a continual flow of caressing flattery, under which were concealed furious appetites which prompted him to grasp at everything and devour everybody just for the pleasure of the thing.
ENGLISH   Clara, herself, inspired with a secret respect for this good fortune, which she felt herself incapable of achieving, bowed her head.
FRENCH    -- Écoutez, mon oncle, finit par dire Denise embarrassée, il y aurait peut-être une place pour vous...
FRENCH   Le soleil baissait, ils retournaient vers Joinville, lorsque deux yoles, descendant le courant et luttant de vitesse, échangèrent des bordées d\'injures, où dominaient les cris répétés de «caboulots» et de «calicots».
FRENCH   Le père Jouve, un ancien capitaine, décoré à Constantine, encore bel homme avec son grand nez sensuel et sa calvitie majestueuse, leur signala un vendeur qui, sur une simple remontrance de sa part, l\'avait traité de «vieux ramolli»; et le vendeur fut immédiatement congédié.
FRENCH    -- On prévient, reprit-il en se fâchant peu à peu de sa propre dureté.
ENGLISH    \"Ninety francs!\" murmured Madame de Boves, \"one must be very poor indeed to go without one at that price.\"  She had taken up the fan, and was again examining it with her daughter Blanche; and, over her large regular face and in her big, sleepy eyes, spread an expression of suppressed and despairing longing which she could not satisfy.
ENGLISH   Gradually the rooms emptied and the salesmen returned to their departments, loitering as they went up the stairs.
FRENCH   Mais la porte de la boutique s\'ouvrit, et elle recula tout d\'un coup, muette et pâle.
ENGLISH   Madame Marty, carried away by her rage for spending money, bought everything at The Ladies\' Paradise without selecting, just as things chanced to be placed in the windows or on the counters.
FRENCH   Enfin, pendant que M.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, ça m\'est égal, je les ai vus.
ENGLISH   And they then went on talking of a party of six, which they had formed part of, at a restaurant at Bougival, where the women had paid their shares.
ENGLISH   Oh! madame would certainly give more, for it would be impossible to find anything at all suitable for two hundred francs.
FRENCH   Maintenant, les yeux limpides, le teint pâle, elle était sans un frisson, toute à sa besogne, résolue à s\'écraser le coeur et à ne faire que son vouloir.
FRENCH   La femme venait passer chez lui les heures vides, les heures frissonnantes et inquiètes qu\'elle vivait jadis au fond des chapelles: dépense nécessaire de passion nerveuse, lutte renaissante d\'un dieu contre le mari, culte sans cesse renouvelé du corps, avec l\'au-delà divin de la beauté.
FRENCH    Elle avait rougi, elle songeait aux inventions abominables de Marguerite et de Clara.
ENGLISH   You see, when a chap doesn\'t know how to rob other fellows of their sweethearts, and is too awkward to earn as much as the others, why the best thing he can do is to go into some corner and die.
ENGLISH   A few minutes had sufficed to fill the roadway with puddles, a stream of dirty water was running along the gutters, the pavement was sticky with a thick black mud; and through the beating rain she saw nothing but a confused stream of umbrellas, pushing along and swelling in the gloom like great black wings.
FRENCH   Depuis longtemps, il voulait le lui écrire; et jamais elle ne l\'aurait su peut-être, sans cette belle nuit complice, sans cette eau qui chantait et ces arbres qui les couvraient du rideau de leurs ombrages.
FRENCH   Seulement, l\'idée de souffler une bonne cliente à la nouvelle venue, l\'éperonnait.
FRENCH   J\'attendrai, j\'ai tout mon petit monde à vêtir.
ENGLISH   The rumour ran that Madame Aurélie\'s gains would exceed twenty-five thousand francs; and this huge sum greatly excited the young ladies.
ENGLISH   And she offered some sandwiches to Vallagnosc with her usual graceful smile.
ENGLISH   From the centre of the Place Gaillon you could see this oriental saloon, composed solely of carpets and door-curtains hung up under his direction.
FRENCH    Et, ayant fini de signer les traites, il se leva, il vint donner des tapes amicales sur les épaules de l\'intéressé, qui se remettait difficilement.
ENGLISH    \"Be off!\" repeated Denise, \"be off! If I can, I\'ll send you the fifteen francs all the same.\"  Jean, bewildered, scampered away.
FRENCH   Comme ces dames traversaient le rayon des dentelles, une nouvelle rencontre se produisit.
FRENCH    Alors, Mouret s\'approcha pour lui dire à voix plus basse:  -- Ce soir, après la vente, veuillez passer à mon cabinet.
ENGLISH   costumes, mantles, jackets; a medley of little garments, stiff in their infantile grace, something like the contents of the cloak-room of a band of big dolls, taken out of the wardrobes and given over to pillage.
ENGLISH    \"Besides,\" the young man concluded, \"it would require millions.\"  \"Suppose they were found?\" observed Madame Desforges, quietly.
ENGLISH   It all appeared endless to Denise, thus seen in perspective, with the display down below and the plate glass windows above, through which a long line of counters was to be perceived.
FRENCH   Ça vous semble donc vilain?  -- Non, répondit Denise.
FRENCH    Vallagnosc, dans la joie de leur rencontre, gardait son air las et désenchanté; et, comme son ami, étonné, insistait, en disant:  -- Enfin, tu fais bien quelque chose...
FRENCH    Sans ouvrir les lèvres, Mme Baudu confirma ces paroles d\'un signe de tête.
FRENCH    Il l\'interrompit d\'un éclat de voix terrible:  -- Quatre-vingt mille francs! quatre-vingt mille francs!...
FRENCH   Il doit venir me chercher, en sortant de Bonaparte.
FRENCH    -- Vraiment, dit enfin Mme Bourdelais, il faut me mieux traiter, autrement, j\'irai en face, comme les autres.
FRENCH   Pourtant, elle s\'orienta: le blanc, à sa gauche, faisait une coulée pâle, comme le bleuissement des maisons d\'une rue, sous un ciel d\'été; alors, elle voulut traverser tout de suite le hall, mais elle se heurta dans des piles d\'indienne et jugea plus sûr de suivre la bonneterie, puis les lainages.
ENGLISH   At Cornaille\'s the mantles had been her department, but she had never seen anything like this, and remained rooted to the spot with admiration.
FRENCH    -- Regarde donc, maman, disait Blanche qui fouillait, à côté, un carton plein de petites valenciennes à bas prix, on pourrait prendre de ça pour les oreillers.
ENGLISH   It dominated everything, covering a whole district with its shadows.
FRENCH   Elle l\'aimait lorsqu\'elle le redoutait comme un maître sans pitié, elle l\'aimait lorsque son coeur éperdu rêvait de Hutin, inconscient, cédant à un besoin d\'affection.
ENGLISH   The Paradise people, less artistic, paid more attention to the material, extolling their alpacas and mohairs, twills and sarcenets.
ENGLISH   And they went on to speak of the salaries--the rises--the eternal subject, the stirring question which occupied them all.
FRENCH    1.F.2.
ENGLISH   She held him there, pressing him to her virgin bosom, her eyes wandering far away into the darkness.
FRENCH    -- Oh! cria-t-elle, ils sont plus beaux que moi.
ENGLISH   Several times, on returning from a pay-desk, she found herself making a _détour_, and traversing the silk hall though she had no business there, her bosom heaving the while with emotion.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle showed evident signs of impatience; her remark fell, moreover, amidst a most discouraging silence.
ENGLISH   Denise had turned very red; she would never dare to enter that great shop, and yet the idea of belonging to it filled her with pride.
ENGLISH   Those scoundrels are creating departments for flowers, bonnets, perfumery, boots and shoes, all sorts of things.
FRENCH   C\'était fini, il fallait plier l\'échine: après ceux-là, d\'autres encore seraient balayés, et il n\'y avait plus de raison pour que tous les commerces ne fussent tour à tour chassés de leurs comptoirs.
ENGLISH   You saw it was quite easy.
ENGLISH   Nothing but her eyes seemed to be alive in her white face; and with head erect, she obstinately gazed upon The Ladies\' Paradise opposite, through the small curtains of the windows.
FRENCH   Au-dehors, une aigre bise soufflait, les passants, surpris de ce retour d\'hiver, filaient vite, en boutonnant leurs paletots.
ENGLISH   \"When there\'s work,\" he added, \"we never refuse the men.\"  Up above, under the roof, were the bedrooms occupied by the saleswomen.
FRENCH    -- Non, non, ne vous frappez donc pas, il vous faut des soins, rien de plus.
ENGLISH   Was he no longer master in the place, that they dared to give orders? Everything must pass through his hands, absolutely everything; and he would immediately crush any one who should resist.
FRENCH   Oui, je passe les nuits...
ENGLISH   You\'ve been sent by them, haven\'t you? Well, tell them that old Bourras still knows how to use his hands and that he can find work wherever he likes.
ENGLISH   The drivers, clad in black and dignified in manner, held the horses well in--superb horses they were, champing silvered bits.
FRENCH   Lui, touchait son tant pour cent sur le bénéfice total, et son affaire n\'était pas de baisser les prix.
ENGLISH   Jean, however, had turned pale, whilst Denise hugged the terrified Pépé to her bosom.
ENGLISH   She listened, delighted.
FRENCH    Denise, cette nuit-là, eut encore une insomnie.
FRENCH   Alors, ce fut une désolation; quatre d\'entre elles se mirent à le servir, mais à la condition qu\'il répondrait ensuite.
FRENCH   Tout le monde aimait l\'artichaut.
FRENCH   Vous verrez nos matelassés, nos cheviottes...
FRENCH    -- Je désirerais un manteau, dit Mme Marty.
FRENCH    -- C\'est bien, mon oncle, répéta-t-elle.
FRENCH    On finit par rire, le paradoxe semblait un peu fort.
ENGLISH    She followed him, they descended the two storeys, and crossed the furniture and carpet departments without saying a word.
ENGLISH   A few men, buried beneath the overflowing bosoms, were casting anxious glances around them.
FRENCH   Ceux-ci, d\'ailleurs, qui ne s\'occupaient déjà plus d\'elle, ne lui rendirent pas même son salut, très attentifs à examiner avec Mme Frédéric le modèle du manteau à taille.
FRENCH   Mouret était devant eux.
ENGLISH   There was an increasing clatter of forks, a gurgling sound of bottles being emptied, a noise of glasses laid down too violently amidst the grinding rumble of five hundred pairs of powerful jaws chewing with wondrous energy.
ENGLISH    Those who had merely secured pieces of carcase were greatly discontented.
ENGLISH   Rocked into a dreamy mood by his declaration of love, her eyes wandering over the roofs of The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   Alors, à quoi bon déranger sa vie, gâter le dévouement maternel qu\'elle avait voué à ses deux frères? Pourtant, elle ne s\'endormait pas, des frissons tièdes montaient à sa nuque, l\'insomnie faisait passer devant ses paupières closes des formes indistinctes, qui s\'évanouissaient dans la nuit.
ENGLISH   \"But flexibility, madame, is the chief quality of this silk.
FRENCH   Dans son continuel tourment nerveux, il sautait souvent ainsi de la crainte à l\'espoir.
FRENCH    Mouret ne défendait pas sa maison, les yeux toujours sur elle, se rassurant, se disant qu\'elle n\'aurait point osé.
ENGLISH   But what delighted the customers above all was a silver fountain in the centre, a shepherdess standing on a harvest of flowers, whence flowed a continuous stream of violet water, which fell with a musical plash into the metal basin.
ENGLISH   Moreover the place would soon be really ridiculous, in its immensity; the customers would lose themselves in it.
FRENCH    Denise se crut sauvée.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! it\'s you, dear madame?\"  \"Yes, dear madame; what a crowd--is it not?\"  \"Oh! don\'t speak of it, it\'s stifling.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! Mademoiselle Denise,\" stammered Deloche, \"why aren\'t you kinder to me? I love you so much!\" Tears had come into his eyes, and as she signed to him to stop, he continued quickly: \"No--let me tell you these things once more.
ENGLISH   Next they turned into the cotton and hosiery departments, where the same good order reigned.
FRENCH   La campagne était donc définitivement gagnée, le petit commerce du quartier mis en pièces, le baron Hartmann conquis, avec ses millions et ses terrains.
FRENCH   Par exemple, notre Cuir-d\'or, ce taffetas à sept francs cinquante, qui se vend partout ce prix, va passer également pour une occasion extraordinaire, et suffira à combler la perte du Paris-Bonheur...
FRENCH   Vingt fois, j\'ai eu l\'envie de vous appeler dans mon cabinet.
ENGLISH    But where Mouret revealed himself as an unrivalled master was in the interior arrangement of his shops.
FRENCH    Elle rougissait, elle comprenait qu\'on ne tombait pas de la sorte chez le monde.
ENGLISH    It was Pauline, on her way across the department.
ENGLISH   It was the expected rush at last, the afternoon crush, which in his feverishness he had for a moment despaired of.
FRENCH   Mme Marty et Valentine entrèrent aussi dans l\'étroite cage, où l\'on fut très serré; mais les glaces, les banquettes de velours, la porte de cuivre ouvragé, les occupaient à ce point qu\'elles arrivèrent au premier étage, sans avoir senti le glissement doux de la machine.
ENGLISH   Really, these mistakes are abominable.\"  Blanche joined them, and they soon disappeared in the crowd.
ENGLISH   I have great friendship for you, because you\'re a nice fellow; but I wish to remain free.\"  \"Yes, yes.
FRENCH   Mais la tristesse augmentait chez les Baudu.
ENGLISH   Madame Marty yielded at once, whilst Madame de Boves declined, preferring to take a turn on the ground-floor first of all.
ENGLISH   As you wish it we\'ll wait, we\'ll try and be reasonable.\"  It was all over.
ENGLISH   For a moment, his hands shaking, and his mouth twitching nervously, he hesitated as to whether he should speak of himself.
FRENCH   Mais un spectacle les rendit graves.
FRENCH   Denise vit une tartanelle à quarante-cinq centimes, des bandes de vison d\'Amérique à un franc, et des mitaines à cinq sous.
FRENCH    Hutin pinça les lèvres, et il soulagea sa rancune sur les cahiers de notes de débit: encore une drôle d\'invention qui leur encombrait les poches! Il y avait entre eux une lutte sourde.
FRENCH    -- Montons vite, dit Baudu, se levant en sursaut.
ENGLISH   He detested her for her gentleness and her charm.
ENGLISH   He whispered a request for twenty francs; he already owed her thirty, a loan effected on the day after some races when he had lost his week\'s money on a horse; this time he had squandered his commission, drawn overnight, and had not ten sous left him for his Sunday.
FRENCH   Elle hocha la tête, regarda autour d\'elle, aperçut les manches et le col dans la cuvette.
FRENCH   Toute la boîte en cause.
FRENCH   En reconnaissant cette voix amie, Denise, souffrante, céda machinalement au besoin d\'un soutien.
ENGLISH   Bouthemont, very pale, had to thank him once more.
FRENCH   Et les chaussures, hein? Valentine.
ENGLISH   Opposite them there was a sort of shadowy wall, a mass of shadow so dense that they could not even distinguish any trace of the path.
FRENCH   Mais, tout d\'un coup, il y eut, dans la salle voisine, un éclat de voix qui couvrit les autres.
ENGLISH   \"You want this cloak changed, eh? Certainly, at once.
FRENCH   Il était depuis sept ans dans la maison; l\'après- midi encore, il avait causé avec ces messieurs; ce fut un coup de massue.
ENGLISH   Overcome with fatigue, she was leaning against the counter while her clammy hands dived into a heap of lace whence a warmth rose to her shoulders.
ENGLISH    \"I\'ve just met some one,\" she commenced.
ENGLISH   She was, however, now obliged to be sparing of even thirty sous for a cab fare and would return home quite ill from the effects of stopping before the displays in the shop windows.
ENGLISH   But, after every explosion of anger, he experienced a relapse of passion, a kind of sacred terror at having insulted his idol.
ENGLISH   10.
ENGLISH   Pieces of woollen and cloth goods, merinoes, cheviots, and tweeds, hung from above like bunting, with their neutral, slate, navy-blue, and olive-green tints relieved by large white price-tickets.
FRENCH   Justement, ce fut à un vendeur de la soie que Liénard confia d\'abord la nouvelle.
FRENCH    Et, comme Mouret, révolté, le regardait d\'un air de surprise, il ajouta:  -- Tout arrive et rien n\'arrive.
FRENCH   Vous me direz s\'il raccroche les femmes, lundi!  Justement, comme il rejoignait Bourdoncle et Robineau, une femme arrivait, qui resta quelques secondes plantée et suffoquée devant l\'étalage.
FRENCH   Une jolie école d\'honnêteté!  -- Dame! répondit Mouret, on a beau les mettre chez elles, on ne peut pourtant pas leur laisser emporter les marchandises sous leurs manteaux...
ENGLISH    After that, he went to the other end of the basement, to pay his usual visit to the delivery department.
FRENCH   Ce serait bien cher, elle avait si formellement juré à son mari d\'être raisonnable! Depuis une heure, elle achetait, tout un lot d\'articles la suivait déjà, un manchon et des ruches pour elle, des bas pour sa fille.
FRENCH   Une cliente, Mme de Boves, était venue voir chez lui des manteaux, car il avait joint un comptoir de confections à sa spécialité de soies.
FRENCH   Elle fonctionnait, des files de caisses descendaient toutes seules, sans qu\'on vît les hommes dont les mains les poussaient, en haut; et elles semblaient se précipiter d\'elles-mêmes, ruisseler en pluie d\'une source supérieure.
FRENCH   Des routes, avec des gazons à droite et à gauche, n\'est-ce pas? et, de loin en loin, des moutons lâchés deux à deux, traînant la corde de leurs entraves...
ENGLISH    \"What\'s the matter?\" asked Pauline, quickly, when she remarked her companion\'s troubled looks.
FRENCH    Il riait davantage, et Vallagnosc, près de lui, ricanait, sans dire une parole.
ENGLISH    \"No, no, I\'m not going in, I\'m afraid,\" murmured Madame de Boves.
FRENCH    Dès six heures, cependant, Mouret était là, donnant ses derniers ordres.
ENGLISH   The two men retired into a neighbouring room, whilst the saleswomen searched the countess.
ENGLISH   It was a vast room, with high carved oak cupboards all round it and clear glass windows overlooking the Rue de la Michodière.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! voilà qu\'on sort l\'accouchée, murmura-t-elle, quand elle aperçut Mme Aurélie amenant Denise à son bras.
FRENCH   Il craignait de laisser voir sa joie, il baissait la tête, en roulant les doigts sur les genoux.
ENGLISH   The neighbours, however, shook their heads, saying she would not live long to regret her daughter.
ENGLISH   Then the young man, who was also watching the count\'s gallantry towards Madame Guibal, resumed in a low tone: \"Really, I think you are right.
FRENCH   Pourquoi ces fronces, qui étriquaient le vêtement? et celui- ci, carré des épaules, ne l\'aurait-on pas dit taillé à coups de hache? On avait beau aller en voyage, on ne s\'habillait pas comme une guérite.
FRENCH    C\'était un coin perdu du vaste monde où s\'agitait le peuple du Bonheur des Dames.
ENGLISH   It would be funny if we revived the business with this money.
ENGLISH   I\'m keeping a good look-out.\"  This news deprived Mouret of all rest.
ENGLISH   \"I don\'t wish to take any part in the wedding.\"  They understood each other, and separated with a laugh, exchanging glances of intelligence.
FRENCH   S\'il avait fermé ses portes, il y aurait eu un soulèvement sur le pavé, le cri éperdu des dévotes auxquelles on supprimerait le confessionnal et l\'autel.
FRENCH   C\'est très beau, par chez nous.
ENGLISH   Mouret raised his eyes, then whilst still signing the drafts, remarked:  \"I hope you slept well, Bourdoncle?\"  \"Very well, thanks,\" replied the young man, walking about as if he were quite at home.
ENGLISH   You must appoint me second-hand, now that I\'ve got my baby.
ENGLISH   The work was even interrupted for a time.
FRENCH   alors, je voulais vous dire de ne pas avoir de la peine à cause de moi.
FRENCH    -- Cent quarante francs, dit Albert.
FRENCH   Il était emporté par le jeu de la machine, pris de l\'appétit des autres, de la voracité qui, de bas en haut, jetait les maigres à l\'extermination des gras.
FRENCH   À table déjà, elle avait cru que son coeur éclatait.
ENGLISH    \"That young chap has a good appetite,\" remarked Baudu, observing that Jean had finished his veal.
FRENCH   Celle-ci lui pardonnait tout; mais l\'idée de sa cousine Geneviève mourante, achevée par cette cruauté, la jetait hors d\'elle.
FRENCH   Mais elle reparaissait, et il la traitait en ennemie sérieuse, muet devant elle, attendant de nouveau.
FRENCH   Celle-là, vois-tu, a déjà vingt ans.
ENGLISH   Dear me! what a funny girl you are!\"  And then she had to console Denise, who had again sunk down with her head on the bolster, sobbing and declaring that she would certainly go away, since they attributed to her all sorts of things that had never even crossed her mind.
ENGLISH   At last, Hutin--thanks to his vigorous elbows--was able to open a way for the ladies, by keeping in front of them.
FRENCH    -- Ma pauvre enfant, je m\'en doutais, reprit-elle.
ENGLISH   Still he went to work craftily, ever preserving his amiable air.
FRENCH    Avant de se mettre au lit, Denise voulut achever de recoudre son soulier et faire son savonnage.
ENGLISH    \"But it\'s absurd!\" exclaimed Madame Desforges.
ENGLISH    For a while the work was pushed forward.
FRENCH   Là-bas, pendant des mois, elle mettait des sous de côté; puis, à peine descendue de wagon, elle tombait au Bonheur des Dames, elle dépensait tout.
FRENCH    -- C\'est un peu triste, n\'est-ce pas? mademoiselle, cette monture blanche avec cette dentelle noire.
FRENCH   Demande-leur s\'ils l\'aiment, ton Bonheur des Dames!  Côte à côte, à la place accoutumée où ils se retrouvaient deux fois par jour depuis douze ans, Colomban et Geneviève mangeaient avec mesure.
FRENCH   C\'était une vaste pièce, entourée de hautes armoires en chêne sculpté, et dont les glaces sans tain donnaient sur la rue de la Michodière.
FRENCH   Denise était devenue très pâle.
FRENCH   Au milieu des murs, à moitié construits, troués de baies vides, les lampes électriques jetaient de larges rayons bleus, d\'une intensité aveuglante.
FRENCH   La grande révolution des nouveautés partait de cette trouvaille.
ENGLISH   When Hutin recognised her, occupied in clearing an enormous heap of garments off the counters, he ran up to her.
FRENCH   Chaque nouveau bout de dentelle était pour lui un désastre, d\'amères journées de professorat englouties, des courses au cachet dans la boue dévorées, l\'effort continu de sa vie aboutissant à une gêne secrète, à l\'enfer d\'un ménage nécessiteux.
ENGLISH   On the ground-floor there was a heavy swell, ruffled by a reflux, in which nothing but the delicate enraptured faces of women could be distinguished.
FRENCH   Certes, elle ne jalousait pas ces demoiselles, elle était heureuse de sa solitude, de cette sauvagerie où elle vivait enfermée, comme au fond d\'un refuge; mais son imagination l\'emportait, tâchait de deviner les choses, évoquait les plaisirs sans cesse contés devant elle, les cafés, les restaurants, les théâtres, les dimanches passés sur l\'eau et dans les guinguettes.
FRENCH    -- Mais puisque vous n\'avez rien! cria Mme Desforges.
FRENCH   Reste le nord, où l\'on pourrait créer une concurrence à la place Clichy.
FRENCH    -- Ah! c\'est vous, répondit-il enfin, quand il l\'eut reconnue.
ENGLISH   From beneath the very gracefulness of his gallantry, Mouret thus allowed the baron to divine the brutality of a Jew who sells woman by the pound weight.
FRENCH   Une misère, d\'ailleurs, qu\'on décuplerait, car il se disait certain de faire plus tard reparaître le capital quinze et vingt fois, dans certains comptoirs.
ENGLISH    \"Over the road, over the road,\" he stammered several times.
FRENCH   Puis, brusquement, comme sa fille tournait la tête et que le vendeur s\'éloignait, elle voulut glisser sous son manteau une pièce de point d\'Alençon.
FRENCH   Mignot balbutia:  -- Monsieur, je ne la connais pas autrement...
ENGLISH   To escape this obsession she hurried into the Rue de la Michodière.
ENGLISH   He turned the corner of the Place Gaillon, and all was over.
FRENCH   Ce que vous demandez est impossible.
ENGLISH   And he felt troubled, and again launched out into invective.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! rather!\" declared Vallagnosc.
FRENCH   Oui, mon cher, cette nuit, à ce souper...
ENGLISH    \"Would you like me to stay?\" repeated Denise.
ENGLISH   The affair was talked of at The Ladies\' Paradise, and thought very droll there.
ENGLISH   There she was frightened by a loud noise of snoring.
ENGLISH   But may I be hanged if he shan\'t repent it! I\'ve just found my sign, The Four Seasons, and shall plant myself close to the Opera House!\"  She looked at him with a gloomy expression.
FRENCH   Il était temps, ses gros souliers ne tenaient plus.
FRENCH   Aussi offrait-il des crédits très larges à Robineau.
ENGLISH   \"One can hardly believe it.\"  Ever since the advertisements and puffs had appeared, this silk had occupied a considerable place in their daily life.
FRENCH   Elle se contenta de répondre:  -- Nous verrons, mon oncle.
ENGLISH   There, in the gloom, appeared a sombre form, motionless and patient.
FRENCH   Enfin, vers trois heures, Denise, voyant la première s\'assoupir, fila doucement, reprit sa course à travers le magasin, de son air affairé.
ENGLISH   He was thinking about getting away; but not wishing his departure to resemble a flight he resolved to take a cup of tea, and therefore went into the big drawing-room with his friend, both of them in high spirits.
ENGLISH   Those seventy thousand francs would keep the business going a little longer; for in spite of all the repulses the idea of struggling on ever sprang up again; perhaps with great care they might conquer even now.
FRENCH   Naturellement, il était consterné par ce «rendu», qui lui enlevait son tant pour cent.
FRENCH   Quelques hommes, noyés sous les corsages débordants, jetaient des regards inquiets autour d\'eux.
ENGLISH    \"Just tell me, do you enjoy life yourself?\" asked he at last.
ENGLISH   This suffering had elevated him.
ENGLISH   The young girl thought that the windows looked blacker than ever, lower and lower still beneath the first storey, with its rounded prison-like windows.
ENGLISH   They had both been waiting for over ten minutes, and were getting annoyed, when a sudden meeting with Madame Bourdelais and her three children diverted their attention.
FRENCH    Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:  https://www.gutenberg.org  This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
FRENCH   Rien, ce n\'était pas assez.
FRENCH   On me le disait bien, et j\'étais assez bête pour en douter...
FRENCH   C\'était le rayon élégant, un salon véritable, où les marchandises, si légères, n\'étaient plus qu\'un ameublement de luxe.
ENGLISH   It was there that all the provincial and foreign orders arrived; and he went up every morning to see the correspondence.
FRENCH    -- Ils vous ressemblent, dit encore celui-ci.
FRENCH        End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Au bonheur des dames, by Émile Zola  *** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AU BONHEUR DES DAMES ***  ***** This file should be named 16852-8.txt or 16852-8.zip ***** This and all associated files of various formats will be found in: https://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/8/5/16852/  Produced by Ebooks libres et gratuits (Jean-Marc, Coolmicro and Fred); this text is also available at http://www.ebooksgratuits.com   Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be renamed.
FRENCH   Elle est trop distinguée...
ENGLISH   Suddenly he reappeared on the landing of the principal staircase which communicated with the ground floor; and here again he commanded a view of the whole establishment.
FRENCH   Excusez-moi, je vous dérange.
ENGLISH    Then, the checking of the first lists being completed, she left the young girl at one of the tables, absorbed in the adding-up; but came back almost immediately, and placed Mademoiselle de Fontenailles near her.
ENGLISH   Personally, there is only one thing I cannot forgive him, and that is, to have urged on the marriage of my protégée, Mademoiselle de Fontenailles, with that Joseph----\"  \"What! it\'s done?\" interrupted Madame de Boves.
FRENCH    Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain \"Defects,\" such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
FRENCH   Il lui fallait s\'arrêter toutes les trois secondes, pour ne pas être emportée par le flot qui descendait.
ENGLISH    In the central hall--an inner courtyard with a glass roof--was the silk department.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! quoi? dit-elle.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, reprit Gaujean pour couper court, tout ça, c\'est des théories...
FRENCH   Puis venait encore un bureau, le bureau de défalcation: six jeunes gens, penchés sur des pupitres noirs, ayant derrière eux des collections de registres, y arrêtaient les comptes du tant pour cent des vendeurs, en collationnant les notes de débit.
FRENCH   Le nouveau cabinet du directeur était plus luxueux que l\'ancien, une tenture de velours vert avait remplacé le repas, un corps de bibliothèque incrusté d\'ivoire tenait tout un panneau; mais, sur les murs, on ne voyait toujours que le portrait de Mme Hédouin, une jeune femme au beau visage calme, qui souriait dans son cadre d\'or.
ENGLISH   Fat women elbowed their way along; even the thinnest took up a deal of space, and became quite arrogant.
FRENCH   Ronflent-ils encore, à côté! c\'est ça qui m\'exaspère le plus, parole d\'honneur! de les avoir sans cesse dans le dos, avec leur sacrée musique de locomotive.
ENGLISH   First, this continual circulation of customers will disperse them all over the shop, multiply them, and make them lose their heads; secondly, as they must be conducted from one end of the establishment to the other, if, for instance, they require a lining after purchasing a dress, these journeys in every direction will triple the size of the house in their eyes; thirdly, they will be forced to traverse departments where they would never have set foot otherwise, temptations will present themselves on their passage, and they will succumb; fourthly----\" But Bourdoncle was now laughing with him.
ENGLISH   In fact, the door was half-open, and he could hear Mouret gaily asking Robineau if he had spent a pleasant holiday; there was not the least question of a dismissal--on the contrary, the conversation fell on certain things to be done in the silk department.
FRENCH   Lui, marchait encore.
FRENCH   Mais elle sentit près d\'elle la vendeuse de la lingerie, qui, le matin déjà, avait pris sa défense.
FRENCH    Cette dernière décidait, en arbitre suprême de la mode.
FRENCH    -- Enfin! c\'est vous! dit Mouret, doucement.
ENGLISH   But the window would soon attract them, they would lean against it, and forget themselves in a pleasant gossip, in endless souvenirs of their native place.
ENGLISH   I have never had any luck, I know I can never be happy.
ENGLISH   He was pained to see nothing but scowling faces around him.
ENGLISH   For years past she herself had been caught in the wheel-work of the machine.
ENGLISH    She stammered, and tried to explain that she had been to look for something.
ENGLISH   And from counter to counter a tumult arose, like the clamour of a nation bowing down before the Golden Calf.
ENGLISH   Was it not enough that he had missed a sale down below? Now they kept on delaying him at each turn of the shop! And with his annoyance was blended no little of the rancour that existed between the textile and the ready-made departments, which were in continual hostility, ever fighting for customers and stealing each other\'s percentages and commissions.
ENGLISH   They were leaving, but it was amidst a loquacious outburst of admiration.
FRENCH   Hutin les ramasse, mais elles sont toutes plus sales les unes que les autres.
ENGLISH   In the linen department you heard heavy bales of calico falling; in the mercery department there was a clicking of boxes; whilst distant rumbling sounds came from amongst the furniture.
ENGLISH   Early in February Denise had returned to The Ladies\' Paradise, where she had been agreeably surprised to find the staff polite, almost respectful.
ENGLISH    \"A very good seat,\" he replied with sparkling eyes.
FRENCH   Tenez! mon encrier suffira, vous prendrez de l\'encre avec moi.
FRENCH   Nous ne pouvons rester là.
ENGLISH    After a painful silence, Mouret himself began to speak of the Baudus, by expressing his sorrow at the death of their daughter.
FRENCH   Elles partaient, mais ce fut au milieu d\'une crise bavarde d\'admiration.
FRENCH   Justement, le domestique introduisit le professeur, qui venait la chercher.
FRENCH   Un matin encore, elle eut un entretien avec lui, à la nouvelle que Bourras était jeté sur le pavé, et que Baudu allait fermer boutique.
ENGLISH   She looked very clean in her thin black woollen dress; still the question of shabbiness was of no importance, as the house furnished a uniform, the regulation silk dress; but she appeared weak and puny, and had a melancholy face.
FRENCH   Oui, dans ses constructions! Un matin, en visitant les travaux, elle est tombée dans un trou.
ENGLISH   The other one is manned by students, no doubt.\"  Thereupon he explained the deadly hatred existing between the students and the shopmen.
ENGLISH   This was the first one who did not yield.
FRENCH   J\'ai beaucoup d\'amitié pour vous, parce que vous êtes un brave garçon; mais je veux rester libre.
FRENCH    -- Hein? elles vous font rager? lui dit un matin Pauline.
FRENCH   Toutes avaient, entre deux boutonnières du corsage, comme piqué dans la poitrine, un grand crayon qui se dressait, la pointe en l\'air; et l\'on apercevait, sortant à demi d\'une poche, la tache blanche du cahier de notes de débit.
FRENCH   Quand il la vit si tremblante sous ses mains qui lui effleuraient la nuque, il eut regret de ce mouvement d\'obligeance, car il craignait surtout de perdre son autorité.
FRENCH   Jean, qui était venu la voir la veille, dînait aussi chez l\'oncle.
FRENCH    Cette injustice de la cliente, dépréciant quand même la marchandise, l\'indignait.
FRENCH   Vers neuf heures, ne manquez pas...
ENGLISH   Since their arrival in Paris, they had roamed about, commencing their apprenticeship here, finishing it there, getting dismissed or they themselves resigning all at once, just as interest dictated.
ENGLISH   \"He\'s still shut up, you know; my uncle was to go to see him this morning.\"  Then she paused and exclaimed: \"Oh, look! isn\'t it lovely?\"  The ladies, who had gone on a few steps, found themselves before the new flowers and feathers department, installed in the central gallery, between the silks and the gloves.
ENGLISH   It was a white brightness of a blinding fixity, spreading like the radiance of a discoloured star and killing the twilight.
FRENCH   C\'était un dédain irraisonné, une répugnance instinctive pour ce trou glacial de l\'ancien commerce.
ENGLISH   Since then, however, she had ever been a well-conducted girl, and intended to return to Grenoble to take charge of her parents\' shop, and marry a cousin who was waiting for her.
FRENCH   Regardez comme il me bride la poitrine.
FRENCH   Parole d\'honneur!  La gaieté redoubla.
FRENCH    De son geste mécanique, le cuisinier avait piqué un morceau de viande, puis l\'avait arrosé d\'une cuillerée de sauce; et Hutin, suffoqué d\'avoir reçu au visage le souffle ardent du guichet, emportait à peine sa portion, que déjà derrière lui les mots: «Boeuf sauce piquante...
ENGLISH   The inspector, who came up panting, out of breath, could only distinguish a corner of his white blouse, and his locks of fair hair flying in the wind.
FRENCH   Maintenant, les reflets des glaces n\'étaient plus traversés d\'ombres dansantes, la pièce semblait nue, tombée à une tristesse lourde.
FRENCH    -- Je ne sais pas, répondit-il.
FRENCH    En haut, l\'encombrement était le même.
FRENCH   Il faisait doux, un temps humide de dégel.
ENGLISH   The salesmen on their side were taking possession of their departments, which had been swept and brushed by the assistants before their arrival.
FRENCH   Elle n\'avait plus de sang au visage.
ENGLISH   Full of scorn for Denise\'s small limbs he had condemned her the first time he had seen her.
ENGLISH   She had not said a word; but a pink flame had coloured her cheeks, whilst her eyes moistened with fresh tears, tears of a delicious sweetness.
ENGLISH   When the ladies inquired if the mantle had been made to fit, Mouret carelessly replied that he had given it up as a bad job as far as he was concerned.
ENGLISH   \"Oh! uncle--get married! How can you think of it? And the little ones!\"  She ended by laughing, it seemed to her such a strange idea.
ENGLISH   And not wishing to insist on the subject he added, slowly--\"Don\'t make yourself out to be worse than you are! You\'ll lose something else besides your money.
ENGLISH   Before them extended \"the largest shops in the world,\" as the advertisements said.
FRENCH   Cette façade, qui se trouvait debout enfin, lui semblait petite, pareille à un de ces murs de sable que les gamins bâtissent, et l\'on aurait pu la prolonger d\'un faubourg de la cité à l\'autre, l\'élever jusqu\'aux étoiles, elle n\'aurait pas rempli le vide de son coeur, que le seul «oui» d\'une enfant pouvait combler.
ENGLISH   \"But I\'m no better off than you are; I\'m just going to apply myself.\"  \"Ah, very good,\" said he, quite out of countenance.
FRENCH   Puis, c\'étaient, contre le mur, des grils à faire griller des martyrs, des casseroles à fricasser un mouton, un chauffe-assiettes monumental, une vasque de marbre emplie par un continuel filet d\'eau.
FRENCH    Et ils rougirent fortement, leurs deux timidités demeurèrent un instant face à face, attendries par la fraternité de leurs situations, n\'osant pourtant se souhaiter tout haut une bonne réussite.
FRENCH    IX   Un lundi, quatorze mars, le Bonheur des Dames inaugurait ses magasins neufs par la grande exposition des nouveautés d\'été, qui devait durer trois jours.
ENGLISH    It was quite a surprise.
FRENCH   Mais la nef centrale surtout chantait le blanc trempé de flammes: les bouillonnés de mousseline blanche autour des colonnes, les basins et les piqués blancs qui drapaient les escaliers, les couvertures blanches accrochées comme des bannières, les guipures et les dentelles blanches volant dans l\'air, ouvraient un firmament du rêve, une trouée sur la blancheur éblouissante d\'un paradis, où l\'on célébrait les noces de la reine inconnue.
ENGLISH   From that he went on to the subject so near his heart, speaking of the new thoroughfare, a lengthening of the Rue Réaumur, a section of which running from the Place de la Bourse to the Place de l\'Opéra was about to be opened under the name of the Rue du Dix-Décembre.
FRENCH   Une file d\'hommes attendaient sur des chaises, l\'air ennuyé.
ENGLISH   This seemed to suffice for his timid passion; he continually began the same conversation afresh, unable to resist the impulse and trembling with joy at finding himself with one who had approached Clara.
FRENCH   C\'est moi, à votre place, qui les attraperais! Elles s\'amusent, je m\'amuserais, pardi!...
FRENCH   Enfin, elle entra chez son oncle.
ENGLISH   But very few love-affairs had been known in the establishment amidst the various hostilities and friendships between the men and the women, the constant elbowing from department to department.
ENGLISH    \"What! the food not good?\" asked Mouret, with a naive air, opening his mouth at last.
ENGLISH    \"Your uncle is upstairs,\" resumed Madame Baudu in her broken voice.
FRENCH   Elle me l\'a dit, elle a sangloté comme une malheureuse...
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! il faut bien en finir, dit Vallagnosc, avec un mouvement fatigué des paupières.
FRENCH   Eh bien! oui, elle va avec tout le monde, elle se moque de vous, jamais vous ne l\'aurez, ou bien vous l\'aurez comme les autres, une fois, en passant.
FRENCH   Ce serait seulement une maîtresse gênante, et il n\'aimait guère ce genre-là.
ENGLISH   I\'m obliged to bow to facts.
FRENCH   Elle achetait beaucoup, faisait porter dans sa voiture, puis disparaissait.
ENGLISH   Thus, since her entry into The Ladies\' Paradise, she had been particularly pained by the precarious position of the employees; the sudden dismissals shocked her, she thought them iniquitous and stupid, hurtful to all, to the house as much as the staff.
FRENCH   Sans mes rhumatismes, je me retirais avec dix mille francs de rente, avant dix ans...
FRENCH    Et, tournant sa fine tête blonde vers la maîtresse de la maison.
ENGLISH   However, his anxiety softened him.
ENGLISH   A few women were writing, their faces almost on the paper, as if to conceal their letters under the flowers of their hats.
FRENCH   La peur qu\'il y avait, depuis le matin, au fond de la tentation exercée sur elle, venait peut-être du sang de cette femme, qu\'elle croyait voir maintenant dans le mortier rouge du sous-sol.
ENGLISH   He was, however, always getting into bad company.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! it\'s not luxurious,\" said the old man, \"but the view from the window is gay.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! you\'ve come at last!\" said Mouret gently.
ENGLISH   She would have rather seen him furious, swearing and banging the counter with his fist; the sight of this old man, suffocating and crushed, made her heart bleed.
FRENCH   Aussi n\'en finissait-elle plus de répondre aux deux amies qui s\'impatientaient, lorsque Mme Aurélie aperçut Mme Desforges, dont elle devait connaître la liaison, car elle se hâta de venir demander:  -- On s\'occupe de ces dames?  -- Oui, cette demoiselle qui cherche là-bas, répondit Henriette.
FRENCH    -- Dites, dois-je me mettre à genoux, répéta-t-il, la gorge étranglée de larmes contenues.
FRENCH    -- On dit que vous nous quittez...
FRENCH   Peut- être n\'offrait-il pas assez; et il doubla ses offres, et il la pressa davantage.
FRENCH    -- Madame a tort, répétait Clara.
ENGLISH   Don\'t the figures show the constant increase in our sales? At first, with a capital of five hundred thousand francs, I did business to the extent of two millions, turning over the capital four times every year.
FRENCH    Denise garda son attitude respectueuse.
FRENCH   Lorsque ce dernier apprit le renvoi de Denise, il entra dans une grande irritation.
ENGLISH    Yet Denise bore her triumph in a quiet, charming manner, touched by these marks of consideration, and desirous of interpreting them as sympathy for the miseries of her _débuts_ and the final success of her patient courage.
FRENCH   Du reste, que m\'importe son argent! Je l\'aurais mieux aimé pauvre.
FRENCH   Si vous aviez quelque chose à faire?  -- Non, non.
FRENCH   Mouret, disait-on, avait traité avec le baron Hartmann, président du Crédit Immobilier, et il occuperait tout le pâté de maisons, sauf la façade future de la rue du Dix-Décembre, où le baron voulait construire une concurrence au Grand-Hôtel.
ENGLISH   People currently spoke of \"the Lhomme dynasty,\" since Madame Aurélie, first-hand in the mantle department, after helping her husband to secure the post of chief cashier, had further managed to get a pay desk for her son, a tall, pale, vicious young man who had been unable to remain in any situation, and had caused her an immense deal of anxiety.
FRENCH   Et, alors, le flot contenu depuis le matin creva, tous se soulagèrent, en tapant sur le monstre.
ENGLISH   Flanked by piles of plates, and armed with forks and spoons, which he plunged into copper-pans, a cook was distributing the portions.
ENGLISH   She\'s with the brigands, my word of honour!\"  Baudu, who had so far appeared not to notice Denise, now raised his head, with the surly movement that he affected when standing at his shop door, every time she passed.
ENGLISH   This served, as it were, as an advertisement for his business; and you might have said that he enveloped all women in the same caress the better to bewilder them and keep them at his mercy.
FRENCH    -- Embrasse-moi, mon garçon, dit-il pour conclure.
ENGLISH   Whilst Campion was searching amongst these packets, after consulting a list, Bourdoncle looked at Mouret, reflecting that this wonderful fellow knew everything, thought of everything, even when he was supposed to be amusing himself.
ENGLISH   The broadest commercial ideas sprang up from her experience, behind her narrow forehead, whose pure lines clearly announced the presence of a firm will and love of order.
FRENCH   Ces demoiselles criaient à l\'injustice, l\'accusaient d\'avoir gagné ça au dessert, avec le patron; même elles ajoutaient des détails abominables.
ENGLISH    \"And you paid twenty-five francs for it?\" she resumed, examining each mesh of the lace.
FRENCH   Denise donna un coup d\'oeil aux vitrines de la boutique, où les parapluies et les cannes s\'alignaient par files régulières.
ENGLISH   \"You would be very comfortable there.
FRENCH   Mais elle n\'avait toujours aucun projet, car elle s\'arrêta à l\'angle de la rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs, qu\'elle finit par suivre, après avoir regardé autour d\'elle d\'un air indécis.
FRENCH    -- Poulet, dit Mignot derrière lui.
ENGLISH   \"No! no!\" she exclaimed.
ENGLISH   The architect, who happened to be a young man of talent, with modern ideas, had only used stone for the basement and corner work, employing iron for all the rest of the huge carcass--columns upholding all the assemblage of beams and joists.
FRENCH   Oh! vous pouvez le dire, je n\'ai aucun droit sur vos tendresses...
ENGLISH   And the oriental saloon?\"  \"Ravishing!\"  \"Good heavens! what a success! Stay a moment, we will go upstairs together.\"  \"No, thanks, I\'ve just come down.\"  Hutin was waiting, concealing his impatience beneath a smile that did not quit his lips.
ENGLISH   And all these things appeared to her to be gloomier than ever, and tearful like the shop.
FRENCH   On racontait que le pauvre M.
FRENCH   Quand on pense que je n\'ai pas encore vendu!  Tous deux, guettant les clientes, se soufflaient ainsi de courtes phrases, sans se regarder.
ENGLISH    \"I saw Madame Desforges last night, she was looking delicious at that ball,\" said he, beginning to relate his evening experiences.
FRENCH    Celui-ci restait immobile.
FRENCH    Mais, avant de faire un tour dans le magasin, il voulut monter au service des expéditions, qui occupait plusieurs pièces du deuxième étage.
FRENCH    Non, il ne disait rien, il ne trouvait rien à dire.
ENGLISH    \"Frankly, you can\'t defend them.
ENGLISH   Go and live happily, you who are young, and don\'t prevent old people from sticking to their ideas.\"  He cast a last glance at the heap of rubbish, and then went painfully away.
FRENCH    Aussi, le Bonheur des Dames, dès huit heures, flambait-il aux rayons de ce clair soleil, dans la gloire de sa grande mise en vente des nouveautés d\'hiver.
FRENCH   Il était le dernier, je l\'avais élevé comme mon fils.
FRENCH    -- Mais que ferez-vous ensuite? murmura-t-elle, cherchant une transition pour arriver à l\'offre qu\'elle n\'osait formuler.
ENGLISH    \"As you have nothing presentable to show me here, conduct me to the dress and costume department,\" she said all at once.
FRENCH   If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
FRENCH    -- Jamais!...
FRENCH   Et personne ici qui nous avertisse! Vous vous entendez tous, ma parole! Nous sommes dans une véritable forêt de Bondy, volés, pillés, saccagés! C\'est à n\'en plus laisser sortir un seul, sans fouiller ses poches!  Des murmures se firent entendre.
ENGLISH   Long eddies would now and again part the crowd; the fever of the day\'s great sale swept past like a frenzy through the disorderly, billowy sea of heads.
FRENCH   Tous plus coquins les uns que les autres!...
ENGLISH   The baron was looking at him, so touched by his graceful command over himself that he changed the conversation, returning to the fêtes that were being given to the King of Prussia: they would be superb, said he, the whole trade of Paris would profit by them.
FRENCH   Elle resta une minute sans comprendre, elle les regarda passer des châles à l\'ameublement, puis à la lingerie, épouvantée de leur manoeuvre étrange, de la clef qui grinçait, des portes de tôle qui retombaient avec un bruit de massacre.
FRENCH    -- Si on les trouvait? dit simplement Mme Desforges.
FRENCH   Elle rougissait de plaisir, une pudeur de femme qui se déshabille la rendait charmante et embarrassée, à chaque article nouveau qu\'elle sortait.
FRENCH   Un instant, il causa des démolitions, il approuva la rue du Dix-Décembre, dont la trouée allait certainement accroître le commerce du quartier.
FRENCH    -- Je n\'ai pas de besoins...
FRENCH   Nous ne serons que tous les trois...
ENGLISH   \"If Gaujean doesn\'t behave sensibly,\" he replied, \"Gaujean will be floored.
FRENCH   Quelques têtes de commis curieux se montraient derrière les glaces; mais le colosse gardait son indifférence de machine lancée à toute vapeur, inconsciente des morts qu\'elle peut faire en chemin.
FRENCH    Très apitoyée, sans comprendre pourtant, la lingère chercha des consolations.
ENGLISH   You were quite right to make haste in defending her last night at the café!\"  Then he also ran off; but before he had returned to the woollen department, he had already related the story to four or five fellows.
ENGLISH   She knew how such things came about; it was always during some similar excursions that the young ladies had made the acquaintance of their lovers.
FRENCH    Il tourna le dos.
ENGLISH    \"And what about silk, your Paris Delight which all the papers are talking of?\" resumed Madame Marty, impatiently.
FRENCH   il vous répondra mieux que moi.
FRENCH   Lorsqu\'elle avait passé la journée debout, il lui fallait rentrer vite, s\'occuper de Pépé, que le vieux Bourras, heureusement, s\'obstinait à nourrir; mais c\'étaient encore des soins, une chemise à laver, une blouse à recoudre, sans compter le tapage du petit, dont elle avait la tête fendue.
FRENCH   Seuls, les riches fabricants de Lyon, comme Dumonteil, pouvaient accepter les exigences des grands magasins; ils se contentaient d\'alimenter avec eux leurs métiers, quittes à chercher ensuite des bénéfices, en vendant aux maisons moins importantes.
FRENCH   Mais elle, le coude au bord du velours, le poignet levé, lui livrait ses doigts de l\'air tranquille dont elle donnait son pied à sa femme de chambre, pour que celle-ci boutonnât ses bottines.
ENGLISH    \"You look unwell, Monsieur Mouret,\" all at once observed Madame de Boves.
ENGLISH    Mouret was now in a state of astonished indignation, and exclaimed: \"What? Do I enjoy myself? What are you talking about? Why, of course I do, my boy, and even when things give way, for then I am furious at hearing them cracking.
ENGLISH   Only his feet are hurt.
FRENCH   Elle avait remarqué l\'amour transi de Colomban, elle eut l\'idée de plaisanter les Baudu.
FRENCH   Comme on apportait le café, la gaieté fut encore accrue par l\'arrivée de Vinçard.
ENGLISH   As it happened, a part of his duties was to exercise a control over the prices fixed upon in order to prevent Bouthemont from selling at too small a profit for the sole purpose of increasing the sales.
FRENCH   Seulement, ces débuts d\'un aventurier de l\'amour, dont le magasin plaisantait, finissaient par se perdre dans le coup de génie de cet homme, dans sa grâce victorieuse.
FRENCH   La boutique gardait son odeur de vieux, son demi-jour, où tout l\'ancien commerce, bonhomme et simple, semblait pleurer d\'abandon.
FRENCH    -- Dites donc, et votre Robineau? demanda un vendeur à Hutin.
ENGLISH   Robineau was condemned, and each was grabbing for one of his bones.
ENGLISH   However, I shall be happy to return you this document whenever you like to bring me a sum of two thousand francs for the poor.\"  She again rose and declared in a fresh outburst: \"I\'ll never sign that, I\'d rather die.\"  \"You won\'t die, madame; but I warn you that I shall shortly send for the police.\"  Then followed a frightful scene.
FRENCH   C\'est bien simple, mademoiselle va vous prendre mesure, et nous vous en ferons un autre.
FRENCH    Et il conta gaiement la colère du bonhomme, enragé contre les grands bazars parisiens, du fond de sa petite boutique de province.
ENGLISH   Night and day he racked his brain to invent fresh attractions.
ENGLISH   \"But you are a poet in your way, let me tell you once more.
FRENCH   Mais le pis était que l\'architecte, pour relier les rayons existants du magasin, avec les rayons qu\'on installait dans l\'ancien Hôtel Duvillard, avait imaginé de creuser un passage, sous la petite maison qui les séparait.
FRENCH    Vivement, elle avait refermé le sac, et elle le fit disparaître sous un fauteuil, d\'un mouvement instinctif.
ENGLISH   But what a coward he was, and how she scorned him now! A great trouble had come upon her; was it not strange that she should have found the strength just now to repulse a man whom she adored, when she had felt herself so feeble in bygone days before that worthless fellow, whom she had only dreamed of? Her sense of reason and her bravery foundered in these contradictions of her being, which she could not clearly read.
ENGLISH    \"In the Rue de Rivoli, at the corner of the Rue d\'Alger--Madame Desforges.\"  At this early hour the sorting tables were yet bare and the compartments only contained a few parcels left over night.
ENGLISH    \"You know I am yours,\" he murmured in conclusion.
ENGLISH    Denise still lived amidst all the hubbub of The Ladies\' Paradise.
ENGLISH   Very likely I may be worsted.
ENGLISH   When Pauline learnt the news, she was in the baby-linen department with Deloche, and the sudden joy exhibited by the young man made her very angry.
ENGLISH   Doubtless this little girl had got used to the atmosphere of Paris, she was becoming quite a woman, and was really perturbing, with her sound common-sense and her beautiful sweet-scented hair.
FRENCH   Plusieurs de ces demoiselles se le ménagent.
FRENCH    Mais si, de part et d\'autre, l\'honneur était sauf, la situation devenait meurtrière pour Robineau.
FRENCH   C\'est malgré moi, je vous jure.
FRENCH   Je voulais voir un costume pour Valentine.
FRENCH   Depuis qu\'Henriette avait quitté le salon, et qu\'il savait Denise au fond de l\'appartement, entre des mains jalouses, il éprouvait une anxiété croissante, un tourment nerveux qui lui faisait prêter l\'oreille, comme tressaillant à un bruit lointain de larmes.
ENGLISH   During their closer intimacy he himself had been wont to take him away from the department, and bring him to Henriette\'s during the busiest moments of the afternoon.
FRENCH   À deux reprises, il était accouru déjà pour pratiquer des emprunts semblables; mais il s\'agissait seulement, la première fois de vingt-cinq sous, et la seconde de trente sous.
FRENCH   De vraies loques, dès qu\'on a ça dans la main!  Maintenant, elles étaient intimes, depuis que M.
ENGLISH    \"Well, then, when\'s the marriage to take place?\" asked Madame Baudu.
FRENCH   Mademoiselle Prunaire, donnez-moi le registre.
FRENCH   Aussi tout craquait, la famille n\'existait plus, on vivait à l\'hôtel, au lieu de manger honnêtement la soupe chez soi.
ENGLISH   Hutin, bewildered, furious, finding no one but Favier to confide in, swore that he would go and throw his resignation at the brute\'s head.
FRENCH   Au bout des huit jours, quand elle revint sur ce sujet, en exprimant la volonté formelle de s\'en aller après la grande mise en vente, il ne s\'emporta pas davantage, il affecta de parler raison: elle manquait sa fortune, elle ne retrouverait nulle part la position qu\'elle occupait chez lui.
ENGLISH   Still standing up and invoking the testimony of the outside passengers who had also risen, to look over and see the blood-stains, the coachman, with exasperated gestures and choked by increasing anger, was explaining the matter.
FRENCH   Nous verrons après.
ENGLISH   Then Clara, eating her skate without any show of disgust, with the indifference of a girl who had been used to nothing better than rancid bacon, began speaking of a frightful drama, accounts of which filled the newspapers.
FRENCH   Grâce à l\'énergie du cocher, l\'omnibus avait fait un crochet, et les jambes seules de Robineau s\'étaient trouvées engagées sous les roues.
ENGLISH   The task was all the more difficult from the fact that she had to obtain their forgiveness for her appointment to the situation of second-hand.
FRENCH    -- Comment! ce n\'était pas fait!  Favier lui tendait une nouvelle pièce.
FRENCH    1.E.3.
FRENCH   Et des plaisanteries, toujours les mêmes, passèrent de bouche en bouche.
ENGLISH   \"But she isn\'t ill--you exaggerate! I don\'t see anything myself.
FRENCH   Quelle horreur!  -- Oui, ma chère, et uniquement pour mettre le talon sur nous.
ENGLISH   \"Yes, I wanted to see you as you are the only one who can tell me.
ENGLISH   Madame Bourdelais explained, with her quiet practical air, that she had brought the little ones to see the show.
FRENCH    Denise ne l\'avait pas aperçu.
ENGLISH   She watched him disappear, elbowed by the crowd on the pavement.
FRENCH    L\'hiver passa de la sorte, Denise obtint enfin trois cents francs d\'appointements fixes.
ENGLISH    \"They\'re very much like you,\" said the latter.
FRENCH   Robineau, il lui est arrivé un malheur...
ENGLISH   It was always thus on chicken days; a wonderful excitement declared itself, the noise at last became unbearable.
FRENCH   Il est de mon pays.
FRENCH   Oh! mon chéri...
ENGLISH   \"And you know that Madame Aurélie and her clique must have taken the Rambouillet train that left at half-past six.
FRENCH   C\'était, au fond du hall, autour d\'une des colonnettes de fonte qui soutenaient le vitrage, comme un ruissellement d\'étoffe, une nappe bouillonnée tombant de haut et s\'élargissant jusqu\'au parquet.
FRENCH   Passez à la caisse!  Les protégés obtenaient quinze jours de vacances, qu\'on ne leur payait pas, ce qui était une façon plus humaine de diminuer les frais.
ENGLISH   Things would not succeed, he was lost, and he could not have explained why; yet he thought he could read his defeat on the faces of the passing ladies.
FRENCH    -- Trois mille francs.
FRENCH   Le total était de quatre-vingts millions, dix millions de plus que l\'année précédente.
FRENCH   Tu as cette grande maison de la place Gaillon, n\'est-ce pas?  -- C\'est cela...
FRENCH   Seulement, entre les pauvres diables frottés de science qui encombrent les professions libérales, sans y manger à leur faim, et les garçons pratiques, armés pour la vie, sachant à fond leur métier, ma foi! je n\'hésite pas, je suis pour ceux-ci contre ceux-là, je trouve que les gaillards comprennent joliment leur époque!  Sa voix s\'était échauffée; Henriette, qui servait le thé, avait tourné la tête.
ENGLISH   Then they stood talking before the window of the other room in a low tone.
ENGLISH   And, as Gaujean went away with the young girl, he confessed to her that Robineau, poor devil, was right.
ENGLISH   Twice already had he rushed in to obtain similar loans, but on the first occasion it had only been a matter of twenty-five sous, and on the next of thirty.
FRENCH   Il n\'y a que Dumonteil pour nous fabriquer ça...
FRENCH    -- Oui, monte, monte vite, ma fille...
FRENCH   Il eut un article à un franc quatre-vingt-quinze, en zanella, monture acier, inusable, disait l\'étiquette.
FRENCH   Sa vie partait de là, il entendait les rires d\'un groupe de fillettes, le ruissellement lointain d\'un jet d\'eau, tandis que, dans l\'ombre chaude, elle marchait près de lui, silencieuse.
FRENCH   Venez-vous?  -- Tout à l\'heure, répondit Denise, qui mordillait une croûte, résolue à demeurer la dernière, de façon à pouvoir aborder Robineau, quand elle remonterait.
FRENCH    Alors, Pauline n\'insista plus.
FRENCH    -- Il y a d\'autre ouvrage pour vous, mademoiselle.
FRENCH   La première s\'avança, et de nouveau l\'histoire fut contée à voix basse.
ENGLISH   The Old Elbeuf, hung with white drapery, lighted up the street with a bright speck, and the candles burning in the gloom seemed like so many stars enveloped in twilight.
FRENCH    Elle hésita, puis avec douceur:  -- Oui, mon oncle, à moins que cela ne vous fasse trop de peine.
FRENCH   Denise, dont les paupières se mouillaient aussi de pitié, lui demanda:.
ENGLISH   Then Madame Marty\'s weaknesses began anew; she succumbed successively before a black silk corset, a pair of fur cuffs, sold at a reduction on account of the lateness of the season, and some Russian lace much in vogue at that time for trimming table-linen.
FRENCH   L\'associé reprit sa marche, s\'inclinant comme toujours devant la supériorité du patron, dont le génie plein de trous le déconcertait pourtant.
ENGLISH    \"Hark, there\'s some one coming.\"  \"No,\" said he, preventing her from leaving the window, \"it\'s in the cistern: all sorts of extraordinary noises come from it, as if there were some one inside.\"  And then he continued his timid caressing complaints.
FRENCH   Mais si l\'argent n\'est rien, il y a des souffrances...
FRENCH    -- Ah bien! cria la lingère, en voilà du zèle!...
FRENCH   Lorsque Mouret avait conseillé à ses commis de mettre leur argent dans la maison, Bourdoncle s\'était exécuté un des premiers, lui confiant même l\'héritage inattendu d\'une tante; et, peu à peu, après avoir passé par tous les grades, vendeur, puis second, puis chef de comptoir à la soie, il était devenu un des lieutenants du patron, le plus cher et le plus écouté, un des six intéressés qui aidaient celui-ci à gouverner le Bonheur des Dames, quelque chose comme un conseil de ministres sous un roi absolu.
ENGLISH    Meantime she looked at him, reflecting that he couldn\'t know anything or he would not employ her in this way with the baron, whom he appeared to consider simply as an old friend of hers.
ENGLISH    \"Wait a minute,\" he continued, folding up the mantle himself, \"take this garment away.
ENGLISH   Hutin was secretly undermining Robineau, whose place he coveted.
ENGLISH   Though they sat close together at table, they remained very quiet, without a blush or a smile.
ENGLISH    Before going to bed Denise wished to finish her boot and do her washing.
FRENCH   Nous n\'avons pas besoin d\'un gros roulement de fonds.
FRENCH   Il n\'avait eu qu\'à se baisser pour prendre les autres, toutes attendaient son caprice en servantes soumises; et celle-ci disait non, sans même donner un prétexte raisonnable.
FRENCH   Mais la vue des galeries, au rez-de-chaussée, le rassurait surtout: on s\'écrasait devant la mercerie, le blanc et les lainages eux-mêmes étaient envahis, le défilé des acheteuses se serrait, presque toutes en chapeau à présent, avec quelques bonnets de ménagères attardées.
ENGLISH   Possibly this long-standing quarrel arose from the fact that the young ladies in the under-linen department wore woollen gowns, whilst those of the mantles wore silk.
FRENCH   Mais, sur le désir de Denise, ils décidèrent qu\'on resterait à Joinville; ce serait drôle, on se donnerait de la campagne par-dessus la tête.
FRENCH   Le baron l\'interrompit.
FRENCH    Cependant, Henriette s\'était assise de nouveau; et, tout en écoutant Vallagnosc, qui lui annonçait la visite probable de Mme de Boves, elle ne quittait pas Mouret des yeux.
FRENCH   Il dédaignait de se cacher derrière Bourdoncle, il faisait lui-même les exécutions, dans un besoin nerveux de rancune, se soulageant à abuser de sa puissance, de cette puissance qui ne pouvait rien pour le contentement de son désir unique.
ENGLISH   Was it not also his fault if the whole shop was talking of the letter written by the governor? He heard them grinning and making abominable remarks about this invitation, which Liénard alone had been informed of, and he reproached himself, he ought never to have let Pauline speak before that fellow; he was really responsible for the annoying indiscretion which had been committed.
FRENCH   Qu\'y a-t-il donc?  Il rougit, il expliqua qu\'il avait rencontré la soeur d\'un camarade.
ENGLISH   Not one of the many customers had observed the scene, and Deloche, on turning to the counter, looked at her as she was walked off, his mouth wide open with astonishment.
FRENCH    Il relevait la tête, défendant encore ses idées, dans ce commis qui le trahissait.
FRENCH    -- Prends garde, il va te mordre...
FRENCH   Au magasin, d\'ailleurs, il se contentait de petites privautés, claquait doucement de ses doigts enflés les joues des demoiselles complaisantes, leur prenait les mains, puis les gardait, comme s\'il les avait oubliées dans les siennes.
FRENCH   Mais c\'est encore bon, vois-tu, presque aussi bon que des caresses, les blessures qu\'elles font...
FRENCH   Toute une bataille du négoce montait, les vendeurs tenaient à merci ce peuple de femmes, qu\'ils se passaient des uns aux autres, en luttant de hâte.
ENGLISH   His courage was entirely exhausted.
FRENCH   Ses achats avaient tellement grossi, depuis les cravates, les gants brodés et l\'ombrelle rouge, que le dernier vendeur venait de se décider à mettre sur une chaise le paquet, qui lui aurait cassé les bras; et il la précédait, en tirant cette chaise, où s\'entassaient des jupons, des serviettes, des rideaux, une lampe, trois paillassons.
ENGLISH   The battle was definitely won, the small tradespeople of the neighbourhood were done for, and Baron Hartmann was conquered, with his millions and his building sites.
FRENCH   Les mosaïques et les faïences des frises miroitaient, les verts et les rouges des peintures s\'allumaient aux feux des ors prodigués.
ENGLISH    \"Dear me! one must have a taste of everything,\" confessed Mouret, pretending to laugh as well.
FRENCH   N\'est-ce pas? c\'est délicieux...
ENGLISH   In the great metropolis, black and silent beneath the rain--in this Paris, to which she was a stranger, it shone out like a lighthouse, and seemed to be of itself the life and light of the city.
FRENCH   Les deux autres se perdirent dans la foule compacte du rez-de-chaussée.
ENGLISH   She gave her friend the letter, stammering: \"Look! he has just written to me.\"  Between themselves, they had never openly spoken of Mouret.
ENGLISH   \"You could go and establish yourself elsewhere.
FRENCH   Ils leur feraient la loi, au lieu de la subir.
FRENCH    Octave se mit à rire.
ENGLISH   All the tumult of the crowd buzzed in her head, her legs were tottering and her arms bruised by the handling of so many garments, a porter\'s work which she had never done before.
ENGLISH   But when he had taken her aside and searched her, he was wild with confusion at finding nothing on her--not a cravat, not a button.
FRENCH   Elle se leva, et lui- même, d\'un mouvement instinctif, recula sa chaise, comme si déjà l\'on eût pu les surprendre.
FRENCH    La jeune fille respira fortement.
FRENCH    -- Il fait donc quand même ce que vous voulez?...
FRENCH    Et lorsque Liénard eut métré, pâle d\'une colère contenue:  -- Veuillez porter ça à la caisse 10...
FRENCH   Denise semblait consternée.
FRENCH   Seulement, nous manquerons d\'air.
ENGLISH   Well! the girls here would have devoured me during the first few days if I had not stood up firm.
ENGLISH   But she asked for nothing, she had made no calculations, she simply begged that she might be allowed to live quietly, with her joys and sorrows, like other people.
FRENCH   Et Favier, l\'oeil luisant, se défendait, avec de grandes démonstrations de sympathie.
FRENCH   Il gardait le pas étouffé dont il venait de quitter la chambre, il murmura, comme si on avait pu l\'entendre d\'en haut:  -- Elle dort.
FRENCH   En l\'air, au bout de leurs fils invisibles, les ballons rouges s\'étaient multipliés; ils s\'amassaient en nuages de pourpre, filaient doucement vers les portes, continuaient à se déverser dans Paris; et elle devait baisser la tête sous le vol des ballons, lorsque de tout jeunes enfants les tenaient, le fil enroulé à leurs petites mains.
ENGLISH   Mademoiselle Baudu is quite free to misbehave herself out of doors, if only she worked a bit when she is here.\"  This curt defence was a condemnation.
ENGLISH   In this quiet attire she looked very young, like an overgrown girl, displaying all the cleanliness of careful poverty, and somewhat shamefaced, and embarrassed by her luxuriant hair, which waved round the bareness of her bonnet.
FRENCH   Ensuite Lhomme était passé, étouffant, le sang au visage, le cou serré déjà par l\'apoplexie.
FRENCH    -- Oh! ma chère, bégayait-elle, vous ne vous doutez pas! Ils ont un assortiment de capotes extraordinaire.
ENGLISH   But don\'t do such a thing again, if you value your situation.\"  And then he walked off.
FRENCH    C\'était, dans sa fraîcheur gaie, un vaste développement d\'architecture polychrome, rehaussée d\'or, annonçant le vacarme et l\'éclat du commerce intérieur, accrochant les yeux comme un gigantesque étalage qui aurait flambé des couleurs les plus vives.
FRENCH   Dans le profond silence, un bruit sourd d\'écroulement traversait l\'air mort: c\'était la maison de Bourras qui s\'effondrait, comme minée par les grandes eaux.
ENGLISH   But when the lawyer told me before Gaujean that the posters would be put up to-morrow, I saw flames dancing before my eyes as if the walls were on fire.
ENGLISH   \"Allow me to introduce to you Monsieur Octave Mouret, who is longing to express the admiration he feels for you.\" And turning round towards Octave, she added: \"Baron Hartmann.\"  A smile played on the old man\'s lips.
FRENCH   La jeune fille l\'embrassa, en protestant.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle était resté à l\'écart, l\'air intéressé par la vente; et il ne perdait pas la scène des yeux.
FRENCH   Le bec de gaz sifflait, dans l\'air mort et brûlant de la petite pièce.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle était chargé de la surveillance générale.
FRENCH   Il restait à faire un travail de contrôle, pour lequel, désireuse de silence, elle se retira dans la salle de l\'échantillonnage, en emmenant la jeune fille.
ENGLISH   Deloche had hastened away; Denise, paler than usual, alone remained face to face with Mouret, looking straight into his eyes.
ENGLISH   So she could say nothing more, notwithstanding the grievous pity which she felt for her old friend.
FRENCH   On fait seulement ce qu\'on veut faire, n\'est-ce pas? Moi je ne veux pas, voilà tout!  Comme elle se taisait, un craquement la surprit.
FRENCH   Denise étouffait de larmes.
ENGLISH    \"Forgive me, I must have been mad.
FRENCH    La nouvelle installation du rayon était d\'une sévérité riche, de hautes armoires de chêne sculpté, des glaces tenant la largeur des panneaux, une moquette rouge qui étouffait le piétinement continu des clientes.
FRENCH   Mais je suis bien certain que votre idée ne vaut pas la mienne.
FRENCH   Le caveau des Baudu se trouvait dans la première allée, à gauche.
ENGLISH   \"The quality is the same.
FRENCH   Sans doute, elle savait bien des choses.
FRENCH   Pauline se soulageait.
FRENCH   Sa clientèle, du reste, diminuait au point qu\'il manquait de travail parfois.
FRENCH   Enfin, je le tiens à votre disposition.
FRENCH    Cette plaisanterie fit sourire Paul, qui, dans l\'ennui de son pessimisme, continuait à trouver inepte la turbulence de cette humanité, pour des chiffons.
FRENCH   Cependant, Denise, sans bruit, de peur d\'éveiller l\'attention, tâchait de la soulager.
FRENCH    -- Voilà un manteau terrible, fit remarquer Mme Marty.
FRENCH    Enfin, Marguerite apporta un manteau de soie garni de jais, qu\'elle traitait avec respect.
ENGLISH    \"Well!\" he resumed, \"we\'ll go and see Vinçard.
ENGLISH   He, himself so clear-headed, logical and passionless, incapable of falling into the toils of a syren, had yet to learn the feminine character of success, all Paris yielding herself with a kiss to her boldest assailant.
FRENCH   Pourquoi pas cent mille? C\'est tout cet argent qui m\'indigne.
FRENCH    -- Mais c\'est stupide! criait Mme Desforges.
FRENCH    -- Ils ne nous laissent pas un bon sujet, dit-il.
ENGLISH     On the first Sunday in August, the stock-taking, which had to be finished by the evening, took place.
ENGLISH   The song of the white seemed to soar upward in the flaming whiteness of an aurora.
ENGLISH   Is there anything you want? But perhaps you prefer to have the money.\" Then she turned towards the other.
FRENCH    Denise, cependant, ne songeait guère à ces choses.
FRENCH   Il questionna de nouveau Vallagnosc, et quand il sut que la première idée d\'un mariage, entre celui-ci et Blanche, venait de Mme Desforges, il trouva l\'histoire meilleure encore.
FRENCH   Moi, je n\'en demande que cinquante ou soixante...
FRENCH    Vinçard affecta un grand désespoir.
FRENCH    Et, revenant par discrétion vers la porte, se penchant à l\'oreille de la jeune fille, il ajouta:  -- Le maigre est au Bonheur second à la soie et le gros est un fabricant de Lyon.
FRENCH   Une ancienne romance chantait dans sa mémoire, la fiancée du matelot que son amour gardait des périls de l\'attente.
ENGLISH   \"Naturally, if you would like to come back to us----\"  But she interrupted him, refusing his offer with a feverish haste.
FRENCH    -- Voilà! dit Mme Marty, lorsqu\'elle se fut bourrée de lotions, de dentifrices, de cosmétiques.
FRENCH   Un canif lui suffisait, on le voyait les journées entières, le nez chaussé de bésicles, fouillant le buis ou l\'ébène.
FRENCH   Les journaux s\'en occupèrent, Bourdoncle lui-même, ravagé par ces innovations, dut s\'incliner devant l\'énorme réclame.
FRENCH    -- N\'avez-vous pas acheté l\'ancien hôtel Duvillard, cette vieille bâtisse qui me touche? finit-il par demander brusquement.
FRENCH    -- Et Pépé? demanda-t-il.
ENGLISH   The three or four customers buying gloves stood looking on, frightened.
FRENCH   Et la jeune fille, très lasse déjà, étourdie par le monde, perdit la tête; elle n\'avait jamais servi qu\'une clientèle rare, chez Cornaille, à Valognes; elle ignorait encore le nombre des modèles, et leur place, dans les armoires.
FRENCH    -- Que faites-vous là, monsieur, à regarder les mouches?...
ENGLISH   The first-hand came up, and the story was once more related in a low voice.
ENGLISH   His decision, so rapidly arrived at, acquired in a minute such energy that he saw nothing else useful and necessary in the world.
ENGLISH   Strict in her conduct, incapable of any sexual transgression she proved weak and cowardly before the least bit of finery.
ENGLISH   Never mind! I\'ve no longer got the house, but I don\'t go playing music in one direction, whilst you are gadding about in the other.
FRENCH    -- Attendez, continua-t-il en pliant lui-même le manteau, remportez ce vêtement.
ENGLISH   \"Just fancy, I\'ve not sold a thing yet.\"  Both of them, on the look-out for customers, from time to time whispered such short remarks as these, without looking at each other.
ENGLISH   \"But you were at Valognes.
ENGLISH   What was the matter with them all? why were they tormenting themselves like this? She thought herself very fortunate not to be in love with anybody.
FRENCH    -- Et elle fait surtout plus d\'effet qu\'elle n\'est bonne, dit Bouthemont.
ENGLISH   It was very curious, said he, they could not form an idea of the number of thieves arrested in the lace department.
ENGLISH   And thanks, I was tormented by the wish to know, and now am satisfied.
ENGLISH   But he also had the grief of seeing that Robineau was selling Madame Boutarel a large quantity of silk.
FRENCH   Mme Desforges.
FRENCH   La machine devait s\'échauffer, si l\'on voulait finir le soir même.
FRENCH   Mais, lentement, il se tourna, il la regarda.
ENGLISH   The despairing Baudus looked on at this implacable dust penetrating everywhere--filtering through the closest woodwork, soiling the goods in their shop, even gliding into their beds; and the idea that they must continue to breathe it--that it would end by killing them--empoisoned their existence.
FRENCH   Chacune était maîtresse d\'agir à son goût.
FRENCH    Ce qu\'elle taisait, c\'était l\'escapade amoureuse de Jean, des lettres écrites à une fillette noble de la ville, des baisers échangés par-dessus un mur, tout un scandale qui l\'avait déterminée au départ; et elle accompagnait surtout son frère à Paris pour veiller sur lui, prise de terreurs maternelles, devant ce grand enfant si beau et si gai, que toutes les femmes adoraient.
ENGLISH   Two months of patience and gentleness had not disarmed them.
ENGLISH   \"My boy,\" he began, \"you know I\'ve sold my property at Rambouillet.
ENGLISH   \"No, no, it\'s all over.
ENGLISH    The latter woke with a sort of start, and returned her kisses but without finding a word to say.
ENGLISH   Moreover she adored her husband, living solely by his love.
ENGLISH   \"She\'s full of vice! Yes, I know some one whom she set her eyes on.\"  And thereupon he glanced at Hutin, who, in order to preserve his dignity as second-hand, was standing a short distance away without joining in their conversation.
FRENCH   En bas, sous la colossale charpente de fer, dans le hall des soieries, ronflait la vente, la trépidation de la machine en travail; toute la maison vibrait du piétinement de la foule, de la hâte des vendeurs, de la vie des trente mille personnes qui s\'écrasaient là; et eux, emportés par leur rêve, à sentir ainsi cette profonde et sourde clameur dont les toits frémissaient, croyaient entendre le vent du large passer sur les herbes, en secouant les grands arbres.
ENGLISH   After having read the letter, she clasped Denise in her arms, and softly murmured: \"My dear, to speak frankly, I thought it had all happened long ago.
FRENCH   On arrivait alors à la morte-saison d\'hiver, qui va de décembre à février; et elle avait des moments de repos, des heures passées debout, les yeux perdus dans les profondeurs du magasin, à attendre les clientes.
ENGLISH   I do not accept half an affection!\"  He remained motionless with surprise.
FRENCH   Il rentrera pour déjeuner sans doute...
FRENCH    -- Ne mentez donc pas! interrompit Mouret avec un redoublement de violence.
FRENCH    -- Mille francs, ça ne se refuse pas...
ENGLISH   She had become more refined, her skin was whiter, her manner delicate and grave.
FRENCH   Et elle, restée mince, pas plus grosse qu\'une mauviette, comme elle disait, conservait entre eux son autorité inquiète de mère, les traitait en gamins qu\'il faut soigner, reboutonnant la redingote de Jean pour qu\'il n\'eût pas l\'air d\'un coureur, s\'assurant que Pépé avait un mouchoir propre.
FRENCH   D\'un geste machinal, il s\'essuyait le front avec l\'essoufflement d\'un homme qui sort d\'une rude besogne.
ENGLISH   She appeared to be still the same with her simple dress and sweet face; but from amidst her modest bashfulness, there seemed to ascend a penetrating perfume, of which he felt the powerful influence.
FRENCH   Il gelait dans la chambre, le froid semblait y couler des murs mansardés, d\'une nudité de prison; mais elles ne s\'apercevaient pas que leurs doigts avaient l\'onglée, elles étaient toutes à leurs confidences.
ENGLISH   In the flourishing days of their business, they had had to bring up five sons, of whom three had died before attaining the age of twenty; the fourth had gone wrong, and the fifth had just started for Mexico, as a captain.
FRENCH   Mais la malade l\'avait prise, et elle l\'étreignait, et elle la gardait dans un embrassement désespéré.
ENGLISH   His wife\'s bloated, livid countenance, ravaged by fear, terrified him.
ENGLISH   \"A nice thing, I\'ve just seen the unkempt one\'s sweetheart--a workman, just fancy! Yes, a dirty little workman, with yellow hair, who was watching her through the windows.\"  From that moment it became an accepted fact: Denise had a workman for a lover, and an infant concealed somewhere in the neighbourhood.
FRENCH   Pas un liard.
ENGLISH   And he was trying to gaze into her face, when all at once he heard a sob.
FRENCH   Afin d\'échapper à cette fièvre de curiosité, et jugeant d\'ailleurs qu\'il n\'était pas convenable de laisser le magasin ouvert, Denise eut l\'idée de baisser le rideau métallique.
FRENCH   De proche en proche, le brouhaha s\'élevait, devenait une clameur de peuple saluant le veau d\'or.
ENGLISH   Favier, in an undertone thereupon remarked that the stock in hand would form a nice total; the governors would be enchanted; that big fool of a Bouthemont might be the best buyer in Paris, but as a salesman he was not worth his salt.
FRENCH   Il savait donc qu\'elle ne s\'était donnée à personne! Tous deux gardaient le silence, il restait près d\'elle, réglant ses pas sur les petits pas de l\'enfant; et les bruits lointains de Paris se mouraient, sous les ombres noires des grands arbres.
FRENCH   Seulement, quand on est si gentille...
ENGLISH   The salesmen had hoped that, disgusted with the annoyances they were incessantly causing him, he would not return to the establishment; and, in fact, there was a moment, when pressed by Vinçard to take over his business, he had almost decided to do so.
ENGLISH   And then, here, there and everywhere came a display of marvels; Mecca carpets with velvety reflections, prayer carpets from Daghestan with the symbolic points, Kurdistan carpets covered with blooming flowers; and finally, in a corner a pile of cheap goods, Gherdes, Koula, and Kirchur rugs from fifteen francs a-piece.
FRENCH   La veille, il avait arrêté ce qu\'il aurait à dire.
ENGLISH   But her heart commenced to beat violently.
ENGLISH   First came the brown jacket, which Thérèse now wished to change for a white cloth one of the same size and same shape.
FRENCH    -- Avez-vous d\'autres références à Paris?...
FRENCH   Écoutez, nous étions stupides, avec cette superstition que le mariage devait nous couler.
FRENCH   L\'amour, comme les hirondelles, portait bonheur aux maisons.
ENGLISH    Then everything was soon arranged.
ENGLISH   She never went to bed before midnight.
ENGLISH   The Paradise people were buying up leases on all sides, shops were closing, and tenants moving; and in the empty buildings an army of workmen was commencing the various alterations amidst a cloud of plaster.
FRENCH   C\'était fini, il ajouta simplement de sa voix glacée qu\'il ne la retenait plus, puisqu\'elle ne pouvait lui confier les vraies causes de son départ.
FRENCH    La comtesse répondit d\'une voix finement ironique:  -- Vous êtes heureuse, ma chère, d\'avoir un mari galant.
FRENCH    -- Hein? s\'amusent-ils? disait Pauline enfoncée dans une matelote, qu\'elle déclarait extraordinaire.
FRENCH   Il faut voir leur exposition...
ENGLISH   She was never seen out with her husband, a barrister well-known at the Palais de Justice, who led, it was said, a pretty free life between his briefs and his pleasures.
FRENCH   Laissez-moi le temps de réfléchir, nous en recauserons.
FRENCH    Lorsque le garçon apporta le riz au gratin, ces demoiselles protestèrent.
FRENCH   Lorsque Bouthemont avait vu passer Mouret, il s\'était levé de table, ayant fini, et il contait les ennuis de son rayon, il disait son embarras.
ENGLISH   His deep-rooted maniacal commercial honesty was awakened in him; it was this prudent fellow who was right, for there is no such thing as sentiment in business, which is only a question of figures.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle had taken the matter up, for the board had resolved to put an end to it.
ENGLISH   At the further end two young men and a young woman were putting away some pieces of white flannel.
ENGLISH   You know it is not allowed, and if I reported you--She must be very fond of you, your friend Pauline.\" His moustache quivered, and his huge nose seemed all aflame.
FRENCH   Son nom fut prononcé, elle sentit qu\'on parlait encore de son aventure.
FRENCH    Puis, quand Baudu fut là, dans cette petite chambre morne, où il passait les heures sur une chaise, elle prit un air de gaieté, elle cria à Denise:  -- Ne venez pas demain, c\'est inutile.
FRENCH   Et si elle m\'échappe, tu verras quelle machine je bâtirai pour me guérir.
FRENCH    Alors, il dit son pessimisme, les médiocrités et les avortements de l\'existence.
FRENCH    Il redescendait, visitait la caisse centrale, où quatre caissiers gardaient les deux coffres-forts géants, dans lesquels venaient de passer, l\'année précédente, quatre-vingt-huit millions.
FRENCH    Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
ENGLISH   Madame Desforges had found her articles at pay-desk No.
ENGLISH   \"There are some more costumes to be taken upstairs.
FRENCH   Tout bas, il la consolait, il s\'emportait: quelle existence! se voir à la continuelle merci d\'un caprice! être jeté dehors d\'une heure à l\'autre, sans pouvoir même exiger les appointements du mois entier! Denise monta prévenir Mme Cabin, qu\'elle tâcherait de faire prendre sa malle dans la soirée.
FRENCH   Même en faveur des siens, elle ne trouvait pas un soulagement.
ENGLISH   And they were to be all women, which was more amusing still! As a rule, Madame Aurélie killed her holidays like this, in going out with lady friends; for she was so little accustomed to being at home, she always felt so uncomfortable, so out of her element on the rare occasions when she could dine with her husband and son, that she preferred even not to avail herself of the opportunity but to go and dine at a restaurant.
FRENCH   Vous avez beau dire, on est fagotée, dans vos magasins.
ENGLISH    \"You can come in,\" said the shopman.
ENGLISH   As the window overlooked the court-yard, it was already rather dark, and the two nickel-plated gas burners on either side of the wardrobe had been lighted.
ENGLISH   It was just striking five when she found herself on the pavement of the Place Gaillon, bewildered, in the midst of the crowd of people and vehicles.
ENGLISH   On recognising his friendly voice, Denise, suffering as she was, yielded mechanically to the need of some support.
ENGLISH   And amidst the white hangings, in the calm atmosphere perfumed with a faint odour of lavender, they immediately began to exchange confidences in soft, affectionate whispers.
ENGLISH   Take a little amusement, that\'ll wake you up a bit.\"  This was their constant friendly dispute.
FRENCH   Denise eut un soupir de soulagement.
FRENCH   À quoi bon se débattre? pourquoi vouloir s\'imposer, quand personne ne l\'aimait? Et elle s\'en alla sans ajouter une parole, elle ne jeta même pas un dernier regard, dans ce salon où elle avait lutté si longtemps.
ENGLISH   There was no more restraint, mother and daughter vanished in the fever of expenditure which was carrying them away.
FRENCH    -- Il me faut cent francs pour dimanche, reprit Hutin.
FRENCH   C\'est bien simple, mais il fallait le trouver.
FRENCH   Peut- être l\'aimait-il depuis la première minute, même à l\'époque où il ne croyait avoir que de la pitié.
FRENCH   Plus un souffle dans l\'antique logis, son pas régulier et pesant faisait sonner les vieux murs, comme s\'il avait marché sur la tombe de ses tendresses.
ENGLISH   And he could have clasped his hands to ask her pardon for blaspheming in his hours of revolt.
FRENCH    Robineau se contenait, lui affirmait qu\'elle se trompait, avec sa politesse marchande, d\'autant plus respectueux, qu\'il craignait de laisser éclater sa révolte intérieure.
FRENCH   Mais ce qui ameutait la foule, c\'était, à la ganterie, un chalet suisse fait uniquement avec des gants: un chef-d\'oeuvre de Mignot, qui avait exigé deux jours de travail.
ENGLISH   This time Madame Desforges herself, notwithstanding the rancour which had made her vow not to buy anything, succumbed before some finely carved ivory.
ENGLISH   On the floor too were more carpets, a heap of greasy fleeces: in the centre was an Agra carpet, an extraordinary article with a white ground and a broad, delicate blue border, through which ran a violet-coloured pattern of exquisite design.
FRENCH    -- Cinq manteaux, drap, garnis fourrure, troisième grandeur, à deux cent quarante! criait Marguerite.
FRENCH   Les châles, les fourrures, la lingerie grouillaient de monde.
ENGLISH   She thus brought him a half share in the business.
FRENCH   Que diable! toi qui professais le flegme du mépris, devant la canaillerie universelle!  -- Tiens! cria naïvement Vallagnosc, quand ça se passe chez les autres!  Cependant, il s\'était levé.
FRENCH   Ils avaient éveillé dans sa chair de nouveaux désirs, ils étaient une tentation immense, où elle succombait fatalement, cédant d\'abord à des achats de bonne ménagère, puis gagnée par la coquetterie, puis dévorée.
ENGLISH   However, she at last murmured: \"I came at once.
FRENCH   Oh! soyez tranquille, je ne vous tourmenterai plus.
FRENCH   On la met dans son salon, on la regarde; puis, quand elle vous ennuie, on la rend.
ENGLISH   Madame will purchase another one elsewhere.
FRENCH   Il avait payé quarante mille francs la spécialité de soies, et il se lançait avec les vingt mille autres.
FRENCH    -- C\'est un monde, déclarait Mme de Boves.
ENGLISH   They get hold of us by the little ones now! You know how little I spend on myself! But how can you expect me to resist the entreaties of these children, who want everything? I merely came to show them round, and here am I plundering the whole establishment!\"  Mouret, who still happened to be there, with Vallagnosc and Monsieur de Boves, listened to her with a smile.
FRENCH   Mais il ne la voyait seulement pas, il ne se rappelait plus cette petite fille, que l\'impression charmante d\'une minute lui avait fait appuyer.
FRENCH   Dites donc qu\'on me fasse un petit supplément, une omelette, hein! et moelleuse, s\'il est possible!  Pour attendre, comme elle avait toujours des gourmandises dans les poches, elle en sortit des pastilles de chocolat, qu\'elle se mit à croquer avec son pain.
FRENCH    Et le silence retomba.
FRENCH   Le ciel demeurait voilé, une douceur de pluie attiédissait l\'air, malgré la saison; et, dans ce jour blanc, où il y avait comme une poussière diffuse de soleil, le grand magasin s\'animait, en pleine vente.
ENGLISH    She left them in his, her eyes turned pale, her whole strength was deserting her.
FRENCH   Elles étaient pesées, puis elles basculaient sur une glissoire rapide, dont le chêne et les ferrures luisaient, polis sous le frottement des ballots et des caisses.
FRENCH    Le commis prit les articles et marcha devant ces dames.
ENGLISH   But amidst the crowded sea of customers, that sea of bodies inflated with life and beating with desire, one and all decorated with bunches of violets, as though for the bridal of some sovereign, Mouret could now only distinguish the figure of Madame Desforges, who had stopped in the glove department with Madame Guibal.
FRENCH   Maintenant, du trottoir d\'en face, les passants s\'étonnaient, à le regarder agiter les bras et sculpter ses manches.
FRENCH    D\'un regard, Favier, très amusé au fond de l\'aventure, s\'excusa auprès de son ami.
ENGLISH   His sole aim was to intoxicate her with gallant attentions, traffic on her desires, profit by her fever.
ENGLISH   Madame Desforges and Madame de Boves have been to-day, and I am expecting Madame Marty for some flannel.\"  \"For my part,\" declared Colomban, \"I took an order from Madame Bourdelais yesterday.
FRENCH   Du reste, défense de remonter pendant le jour; elles ne vivaient pas là, elles y logeaient la nuit, n\'y rentrant le soir qu\'à la dernière minute, s\'en échappant le matin, endormies encore, mal réveillées par un débarbouillage rapide; et ce coup de vent qui balayait sans cesse le couloir, la fatigue des treize heures de travail qui les jetait au lit sans un souffle, achevaient de changer les combles en une auberge traversée par la maussaderie éreintée d\'une débandade de voyageurs.
ENGLISH   \"Oh! I must tell you.
FRENCH   C\'était d\'abord le paletot havane, que Thérèse, après réflexion, voulait changer contre un paletot de drap blanc, même taille, même coupe.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s my fault!\" he cried to Denise.
FRENCH   Le pas d\'un commis, des paroles chuchotées, un frôlement de jupe qui traversait, y mettaient seuls des bruits légers, étouffés dans la chaleur du calorifère.
FRENCH   S\'il y avait là une tactique savante, elle l\'ignorait, elle se demandait avec désespoir comment faire, pour n\'avoir pas l\'air d\'être une coureuse de maris.
FRENCH   Dans le hall central, une cour intérieure qu\'on avait vitrée, se trouvait la soie.
ENGLISH   They got on very well together, notwithstanding their difference of character, the one carelessly squandering the money which he drew from his father, and the other penniless, perpetually tormented by ideas of thrift; both having, however, one point in common, their unskilfulness as salesmen, which kept them vegetating at their counters, without any increase of salary.
ENGLISH   The case, at any rate, threatened to be a long one, and people became quite impassioned over this interminable duel.
FRENCH    -- Je sais, je sais, madame, répétait paisiblement Bourdoncle, J\'ai l\'honneur de vous connaître...
ENGLISH    \"Five hundred and eighty-seven thousand two hundred and ten francs thirty centimes!\" exclaimed the cashier, whose flabby, worn face seemed to light up with a ray of sunshine, in the reflection of such a huge sum of money.
ENGLISH   He had been married a week before, and on the Saturday his wife, a dark little woman, with a provoking, charming face, had paid a long visit to The Ladies\' Paradise to make some purchases.
FRENCH    -- Qui donc, ma chère?  Geneviève hochait la tête d\'un air incrédule.
FRENCH   Gregory B.
FRENCH    -- Le fait est qu\'elle n\'a rien de beau, dit Mouret, n\'osant la défendre, bien que touché encore de son extase en bas, devant l\'étalage.
ENGLISH   With young ones, things light up.
FRENCH    Denise, rudement, releva ce mensonge.
FRENCH   Puis, comme elle se remettait en marche, il lui laissa quelque avance, et la suivit de loin, sans paraître s\'occuper d\'elle davantage.
ENGLISH   Bead-work wreaths and a great bouquet of white roses covered the coffin--a narrow child\'s coffin,--placed in the dark passage of the house close to the pavement, so near indeed to the gutter that passing vehicles had already splashed the drapery.
FRENCH   Il l\'accusait de socialisme, l\'embarrassait en lui montrant des difficultés d\'exécution; car elle parlait dans la simplicité de son âme, et elle s\'en remettait bravement à l\'avenir, lorsqu\'elle s\'apercevait d\'un trou dangereux, au bout de sa pratique de coeur tendre.
ENGLISH    \"I\'ll walk in front to prevent you from falling,\" said Bourras, entering the damp corridor on one side of the shop.
ENGLISH   But her old woollen dress was an especial source of anxiety to her; she had no other, and was forced to put it on every evening when she quitted the uniform silk, and this wore it terribly; a stain on it gave her quite a fever, the least rent was a catastrophe.
ENGLISH   For that reason he offered Robineau plenty of credit.
ENGLISH   However, the food had been of much better quality since the late improvements.
FRENCH   Et rien que des femmes, ce qui était plus amusant! D\'habitude, Mme Aurélie tuait de la sorte ses jours de congé, en se promenant avec des dames; car elle avait si peu l\'habitude de se trouver en famille, elle était si mal à son aise, si dépaysée, les rares soirs où elle pouvait dîner chez elle, entre son mari et son fils, qu\'elle préférait, même ces soirs-là, lâcher le ménage et aller dîner au restaurant.
FRENCH    -- N\'est-ce pas, tu t\'y présenteras demain? finit par demander le drapier, tourmenté d\'incertitude, et sentant bien d\'ailleurs que sa nièce était conquise comme les autres.
FRENCH   Toujours debout, piétinant du matin au soir, grondée si on la voyait s\'appuyer une minute contre la boiserie, elle avait les pieds enflés, des petits pieds de fillette qui semblaient broyés dans des brodequins de torture; les talons battaient de fièvre, la plante s\'était couverte d\'ampoules, dont la peau arrachée se collait à ses bas.
FRENCH    Lui, ne sentait rien.
FRENCH   Comme elle arrivait au bas du petit escalier de gauche, doucement, en s\'appuyant à la rampe, elle tomba sur un groupe de vendeurs qui ricanaient.
FRENCH   Au centre, dans l\'axe de la porte d\'honneur, une large galerie allait de bout en bout, flanquée à droite et à gauche de deux galeries plus étroites, la galerie Monsigny et la galerie Michodière.
FRENCH   Selon lui, sa maison était une affaire d\'or; et, dans l\'éclat de sa grosse santé, il s\'interrompait pour geindre, pour se plaindre de ses sacrées douleurs, qui le forçaient à manquer sa fortune.
FRENCH    Il se décidait à un coup de force, il ne voulait pas consulter Mouret, de peur d\'une faiblesse.
ENGLISH   Jean meantime had gone to the shop-door, and stood there watching all the outdoor life and smiling at the pretty girls.
ENGLISH   She stammered, they all used to laugh at her, he himself had thought her ugly at first.
FRENCH   Elle tenait ses souliers, les examinait, regardait comment elle pourrait les mener au bout du mois.
FRENCH    -- Une bêtise, murmura-t-il.
ENGLISH   The poor child is very downhearted at the thought of being shut up in Paris whilst we shall be enjoying ourselves.\"  Denise smiled at them, in spite of her suffering.
ENGLISH   Then the sight of Pépé sleeping on the chair, amidst the hubbub of the discussion, seemed to suddenly inspire him with compassion.
ENGLISH   Once more she forgot Robineau, and went back to her counter, while Jouve repaired to the manager\'s office to report the matter.
ENGLISH   Had she not already suffered too much from the gossip of the house? Did he wish her to pass in the eyes of others and his own for a worthless woman? No, no, she would be strong, she would certainly prevent him doing such a foolish thing.
ENGLISH    \"I\'m watching,\" he replied.
FRENCH   Le salon, avec son meuble Louis XVI de brocatelle à bouquets, ses bronzes dorés, ses grandes plantes vertes, avait une intimité tendre de femme, malgré la hauteur du plafond; et par les deux fenêtres, on apercevait les marronniers des Tuileries, dont le vent d\'octobre balayait les feuilles.
FRENCH   C\'est toute une affaire, quand il faut habiller ce petit monde...
FRENCH   S.
ENGLISH   Music was his only vice, a secret vice which he indulged in solitarily, frequenting theatres, concerts and recitals.
ENGLISH    Such then was her life now.
FRENCH   Puis, après avoir inventé des prétextes pour aller déchiffrer les lettres à l\'autre bout du magasin, elle était prise de terreurs: ce pauvre Jean lui semblait perdu.
ENGLISH   It had been declared a work of public utility eighteen months previously; the expropriation jury had just been appointed; and the whole neighbourhood was excited about this new street, anxiously awaiting the commencement of the works, and taking a keen interest in the houses condemned to disappear.
FRENCH   Ils sont toujours ensemble.
FRENCH   Puis, après chacune de ses colères, il y avait en lui une rechute de passion, comme une terreur sacrée d\'avoir insulté son idole.
FRENCH   Henriette finit par la tranquilliser d\'un mot.
ENGLISH   Her own heart was bursting.
FRENCH   Quelques clientes vinrent, mirent ces demoiselles en nage, sans rien acheter.
FRENCH   Dans la rue, la cohue continuait, les visages s\'entassaient comme au spectacle, avec des yeux luisants; des ouvrières, échappées d\'un atelier, menaçaient d\'enfoncer les glaces des vitrines, pour mieux voir.
ENGLISH   They all belonged to him, they were his property, and he belonged to none of them.
FRENCH    -- Vous voyez bien, déclara Denise.
ENGLISH   It was what she laughingly called \"making a good man of him.\" In her prudent, cautious Norman brain there sprang up all sorts of projects, ideas about the new style of business at which she had already ventured to hint when at Robineau\'s, and some of which she had expressed on the evening of their charming walk in the Tuileries gardens.
FRENCH   Sans doute, il les connaissait, les filles qui battaient les comptoirs, les dames qui, par hasard, y rencontraient un ami; mais si elles n\'achetaient pas, elles faisaient nombre, elles chauffaient les magasins.
FRENCH   Il est mon égal, ça va tout seul...
ENGLISH   If in all this there were any learned tactics, she was totally unaware of it, and she asked herself in despair what she might do to avoid appearing like one who is running after a husband.
ENGLISH   Amidst all his romantic inventions he had almost forgotten the exact truth.
FRENCH    -- Franchement, tu ne peux les défendre.
FRENCH    Jean, étourdi, se sauva.
FRENCH    Au deuxième étage, le jour grandissait, éclairant d\'une pâleur crue la détresse du logis.
ENGLISH   Her silk gown was no longer too big for her, but fitted tightly to her pretty figure, displayed the pure lines of her virgin shoulders; and if her hair, knotted in thick tresses, still appeared somewhat wild, she had at least tried to keep it in order.
FRENCH   Ils m\'offraient douze mille francs de mon fonds et les années à courir du bail, dix-huit mille francs, en tout trente mille...
FRENCH   Il allait passer la journée chez un ami, une flûte d\'un petit théâtre, où des amateurs faisaient le dimanche de la musique de chambre, dès leur café au lait.
FRENCH   Mme de Boves achevait la description de la toilette de soirée: une tunique de soie mauve, drapée et retenue par des noeuds de dentelle; le corsage décolleté très bas, et encore des noeuds de dentelle aux épaules.
FRENCH   C\'était, près des confections, un salon luxueux, garni de casiers, dont les tiroirs de chêne sculpté se rabattaient.
ENGLISH   They had not noticed her descent.
FRENCH    Par phrases coupées, il conta l\'histoire de cet Octave Mouret.
FRENCH    -- C\'est ce que je lui ai dit, déclara Mme Aurélie.
FRENCH   Était-ce possible? un homme d\'un tel flair, qui sentait l\'argent à toutes les profondeurs! Et, tout d\'un coup, il eut un geste de grande éloquence, il montra ces dames dans le salon, en criant:  -- La clientèle, mais la voilà!  Le soleil pâlissait, la poussière d\'or rouge n\'était plus qu\'une lueur blonde, dont l\'adieu se mourait dans la soie des tentures et les panneaux des meubles.
ENGLISH   The cold became sharper still as the night advanced; but she did not feel it, the conversation had stirred her heart\'s blood.
ENGLISH    However, Madame Aurélie hardly knew how to get away in her turn in a decent fashion.
FRENCH   Et tous deux, pris de la fièvre qui battait d\'un bout à l\'autre des magasins, causaient des augmentations probables, sans cesser d\'appeler le stock des soies de fantaisie: on prévoyait que Bouthemont irait à ses trente mille francs, cette année-là; Hutin dépasserait dix mille; Favier estimait son fixe et son tant pour cent à cinq mille cinq cents.
FRENCH   J\'ai voulu suivre l\'exemple de ces brigands, tant mieux si j\'en crève!  Juillet fut très chaud.
ENGLISH   But as soon as she was alone, before the hall staircase, a deeper sense of suffering filled her heart.
ENGLISH    \"There\'s Baugé,\" said Pauline, pointing to a tall young man standing near the fountain.
FRENCH   Qu\'avez-vous donc aux pieds?  Le jour où Denise descendit, chaussée de bottines d\'étoffe, qu\'elle avait payées cinq francs, Marguerite et Clara s\'étonnèrent à demi-voix, de façon à être entendues.
FRENCH   Elle ne l\'écoutait plus, reprise d\'une songerie à ce bercement d\'amour, promenant ses regards sur les toitures du Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH   Il finit par dire:  -- Tu vas trop fort, petite mère.
ENGLISH   Denise, who had been showing customers about in this way ever since the morning, was sinking with fatigue; but she still continued correct, gentle, and polite.
ENGLISH   There\'s only one thing left me to do, and that is, to find them beds.\"  This joke made Paul smile, he who, in his pessimistic boredom considered the turbulence of this multitude running after a lot of gew-gaws to be idiotic.
FRENCH   Un matin, il était près d\'elle, aux trousseaux, quand un garçon de magasin, qui enlevait un paquet, la heurta d\'un tel coup, qu\'elle porta les deux mains à son ventre, en poussant un cri.
FRENCH    -- Comment vingt ans! mais vous n\'en paraissez pas seize!  De nouveau, les vendeuses levaient la tête.
ENGLISH   He wished to set it up face to face with new Paris, in one of those modern avenues through which the busy multitude of the end of the nineteenth century passed in the full glare of the sunlight.
FRENCH   Mais je viens d\'en arrêter une, il n\'y a pas deux heures.
ENGLISH   After purchasing her travelling cloak, Madame Desforges had secured some picture cards at the pay-desk; and she went away scheming how she might get Denise into her house, so as to humiliate her before Mouret himself, see their faces and arrive at a conclusion.
ENGLISH   After leaving the shop, they spent the greater part of their time at the Café Saint-Roch.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! mademoiselle, vous faites un bruit avec vos chaussures! répétait souvent Mme Aurélie, d\'un air agacé.
ENGLISH    Meanwhile Blanche had not strayed far from the office.
ENGLISH   Eight o\'clock was striking at the church of Saint-Roch; and only the early birds of Paris were abroad, a few clerks on their way to business, and housewives flitting about on their morning shopping.
FRENCH   Pourtant, l\'inquiétude l\'attendrissait.
ENGLISH   He\'s always saying, \'I\'ve robbed you; it was your money.\' And at night he dreamed of those sixty thousand francs, waking up covered with perspiration, calling himself an incompetent fellow and saying that those who have no head for business ought not to risk other people\'s money.
ENGLISH   \"Ah, I\'m the only one--I\'m the only one left!\" And after a pause, he asked: \"And the youngster?\"  \"He\'ll go back to Madame Gras\'s,\" replied Denise.
ENGLISH   For some time she had been thinking of inviting the young ladies to spend a Sunday at Les Rigolles near Rambouillet where she had bought a country house with the first hundred thousand francs she had saved; and she suddenly decided to do so; it would be a means of punishing Denise, of putting her openly on one side.
FRENCH   À peine pouvait-on citer quelques rares liaisons d\'amour, parmi les hostilités et les camaraderies d\'homme à femme, les coudoiements sans fin de rayon à rayon.
FRENCH   Puis, les vitrines s\'enfonçaient, longeaient la rue de la Michodière et la rue Neuve- Saint-Augustin, où elles occupaient, outre la maison d\'angle, quatre autres maisons, deux à gauche, deux à droite, achetées et aménagées récemment.
FRENCH    Et la première vint enfin enlever le manteau des épaules de celle- ci, en lui disant tout bas:  -- Eh bien! mademoiselle, voilà un joli début.
ENGLISH    He only allowed the chief cook, a terrible Auvergnat, a franc and a half a head per day, out of which small sum this man still contrived to make a good profit; and indeed the food was really execrable.
FRENCH    1.F.3.
FRENCH   Longtemps, j\'ai cru qu\'ils se casseraient les reins; oui, j\'attendais ça, je patientais, tu te rappelles? Eh bien! non, il paraît qu\'aujourd\'hui ce sont les voleurs qui font fortune, tandis que les honnêtes gens meurent sur la paille...
FRENCH   Et, encombrant les comptoirs, des soies de fantaisie, des moires, des satins, des velours, semblaient des plates-bandes de fleurs fauchées, toute une moisson de tissus délicats et précieux.
FRENCH   Elle est nécessaire, vous le savez, car ces velours n\'ont pas réussi.
FRENCH   C\'était donc là qu\'elle allait vivre; et sa première journée se creusait, abominable, sans fin.
FRENCH    -- Tenez-vous droite, dit Mme Aurélie.
FRENCH   On tâche d\'arranger cela.
ENGLISH   The inspector in question, old Jouve, a retired captain, decorated for his bravery at Constantine and still a fine-looking man with his big sensual nose and majestic baldness, drew their attention to a salesman, who, in reply to a simple remonstrance on his part, had called him \"an old humbug,\" and the salesman was immediately discharged.
FRENCH   Le silence recommençait, plus sinistre, et un nouvel écroulement retentissait, puis un autre, puis un autre: les Robineau, les Bédoré et soeur, les Vanpouille, craquaient et s\'écrasaient chacun à son tour, le petit commerce du quartier Saint-Roch s\'en allait sous une pioche invisible, avec de brusques tonnerres de charrettes qu\'on décharge.
FRENCH   Pourtant, elle ne répondait point, elle marchait toujours à son bras, du même pas de souffrance.
FRENCH   Au loin, dans les profondeurs des magasins, que Lhomme venait de traverser lentement, de la marche pesante d\'un boeuf trop chargé, on entendait le brouhaha, le remous de surprise et de joie, laissé par cette recette géante qui passait.
ENGLISH   Hutin\'s secret labour, the mine which he had been laying under the second-hand\'s feet for months past, was about to explode.
FRENCH    The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
FRENCH   Dans le coin de gauche, Liénard demandait des choses chères, tandis que Deloche se contentait d\'un bock, qu\'il mettait quatre heures à boire.
FRENCH   Puis, aussitôt, il se démentait, il rêvait une alliance, une entente des petits détaillants pour tenir tête au colosse.
FRENCH   Il montait aux échelles, discutait avec l\'architecte l\'ornementation qui devait être tout à fait neuve, enjambait les fers et les briques, descendait jusque dans les caves; et le ronflement de la machine à vapeur, le tic-tac des treuils, le tapage des marteaux, la clameur de ce peuple d\'ouvriers, au travers de cette grande cage entourée de planches sonores, arrivaient à l\'étourdir un instant.
FRENCH   L\'idée de cette femme morte dans les fondations lui revint; elle eut peur, elle crut voir saigner les clartés; puis, la blancheur des dentelles l\'apaisa, une espérance lui montait au coeur, toute une certitude de joie; tandis que la poussière d\'eau volante lui refroidissait les mains et calmait en elle la fièvre du voyage.
ENGLISH   In fact, he called her an ungrateful girl, and lost his temper.
FRENCH   Aussi, lorsqu\'elle vit Denise passer première aux costumes pour enfants, éprouva-t-elle une joie si vive, qu\'elle afficha à l\'égard de celle-ci les sentiments les plus affectueux.
ENGLISH   \"Are you in want of anything?\"  But as Denise already owed her friend twelve francs, she tried to smile and replied: \"No, thanks.
FRENCH   Elle n\'avait pu encore montrer ses achats, elle brûlait de les étaler, dans une sorte de besoin sensuel.
FRENCH    -- Pourquoi donc? reprit Robineau surpris.
ENGLISH   Were it not for him I should be in a bad way at the shop.\"  His situation at The Ladies\' Paradise had really been menaced since the last stock-taking.
ENGLISH    Bourdoncle alone still stood out.
ENGLISH   Why was it then that she touched his heart in this manner? It was a stupid caprice.
ENGLISH    \"Baron Hartmann,\" now announced the footman.
FRENCH   Marguerite Vadon, née à Grenoble où sa famille tenait un commerce de toiles, avait dû être expédiée au Bonheur des Dames, pour y cacher une faute, un enfant fait par hasard; et elle se conduisait très bien, elle devait retourner là-bas diriger la boutique de ses parents et épouser un cousin, qui l\'attendait.
FRENCH   Puis, elle balbutia:  -- Je ne sais rien, on ne me dit rien...
FRENCH   Merci! pour perdre mon tour!  Cependant, Robineau l\'appelait:  -- À qui la ligne, messieurs? À M.
FRENCH   Elle se sentait violentée, mise à nu, sans défense.
FRENCH   C\'était une pièce assez vaste, tendue de soie rouge, meublée d\'une toilette de marbre et d\'une armoire à trois corps, aux larges glaces.
FRENCH   Maintenant, toutes deux comprenaient pourquoi Mme Desforges était venue au Bonheur des Dames, malgré les batailles de la rupture.
FRENCH   Jamais elle n\'avait obéi à des idées, sa raison droite et sa nature saine la maintenaient simplement dans l\'honnêteté où elle vivait.
FRENCH   Cette femme, dont le ventre énorme souffrait beaucoup des poussées du public, était accompagnée d\'une amie, chargée de la défendre sans doute contre les chocs trop rudes; et, chaque fois qu\'elle s\'arrêtait devant un rayon, Jouve ne la quittait plus des yeux, tandis que l\'amie, près d\'elle, fouillait à son aise au fond des casiers.
ENGLISH   You won\'t let me come.
ENGLISH    One evening when Denise had not even any bread for Pépé\'s soup, a well-dressed man, wearing a decoration, commenced to follow her.
ENGLISH   And the young woman, having taken the parcel, went to the mantle department, followed by her two brothers.
FRENCH   J\'ai du travail pour vous.
FRENCH    Maintenant, il lui arrivait d\'avoir de longues conversations amicales avec Mouret.
ENGLISH   They knew each other, then? Of course, they had grown up side by side at the college at Plassans, and it was quite by chance they had not met at her house before.
FRENCH   Il promit d\'examiner l\'affaire.
ENGLISH   He bent over them to point out the departments, and then they vanished into the vestibule, which had been transformed into an oriental saloon.
FRENCH   Puis, de toutes parts, sur tous les comptoirs, le blanc neigeait, les blondes espagnoles légères comme un souffle, les applications de Bruxelles avec leurs fleurs larges sur les mailles fines, les points à l\'aiguille et les points de Venise aux dessins plus lourds, les points d\'Alençon et les dentelles de Bruges d\'une richesse royale et comme religieuse.
FRENCH    -- Car, enfin, je connais mon lot, dans l\'existence.
FRENCH   Elle ne nous laisserait pas assassiner...
FRENCH   Alors, sans même prévenir Deloche et Pauline, elle passa tout de suite à la caisse.
ENGLISH   Madame Aurélie left Denise for a moment to speak to them about an order for some cloaks which she thought of giving to one of the large Paris houses.
FRENCH    À son tour, elle souffrait.
FRENCH   Tâchez d\'être heureuse, aimez-en un autre; oui, ça me fera plaisir.
ENGLISH   As for me, the house may fall, I shall be found in the ruins.\"  \"Our houses are already falling, neighbour,\" said Baudu with a gloomy air.
ENGLISH   He\'s aware that she fancied me, and he doesn\'t like it; or perhaps it\'s she herself who wants to get me dismissed because I\'m in her way.
FRENCH   Denise ne portait que les mètres de foulard, achetés par Mme Desforges.
ENGLISH   Let me have a good cry, that will relieve me.\"  Full of pity, though not understanding, Pauline endeavoured to console her, declaring that she must not worry, for it was quite certain that M.
ENGLISH    \"Do you require anything to-day?\" he inquired.
FRENCH   Et puis, vous ne savez pas vous habiller.
ENGLISH   Oh, I don\'t blame you for it.
ENGLISH    \"Yes, your lovers! They told me about it, and I was stupid enough to doubt it.
ENGLISH   But he would make a clean sweep, and kick them all out! The explanation he had resolved on, when following Jouve, had degenerated into a violent scene of jealousy.
ENGLISH   Pauline knew everything.
ENGLISH   Still, Denise had to give him notice, and she trembled at the thought, for she felt full of gratitude towards him.
FRENCH   Fais donc un tour avec nous.
FRENCH   Mais, devant ce comptoir banal, elle ne sentait pas les gants, ils ne mettaient aucune chaleur sensuelle entre elle et ce vendeur quelconque faisant son métier.
FRENCH   Voulez- vous que j\'appelle?  Geneviève l\'avait saisie nerveusement au bras.
ENGLISH   Moreover, all his former anxiety reappeared in the presence of these advertising combinations which he did not understand, and he ventured to display his repugnance by remarking:  \"If we sell it at five francs twelve sous, it will be like selling it at a loss, as we must allow for our expenses, which are considerable.
ENGLISH   Let the alteration be made immediately.\"  During this explanation, Denise had ceased looking into the street.
FRENCH    D\'abord, Denise et Deloche avaient gardé le silence.
FRENCH   Hein? ils en font une besogne, ces voleurs!  Elle n\'osait plus parler, remuée par la tristesse lamentable de la vieille demeure, ne pouvant elle-même détacher les yeux des pierres moisies qui tombaient.
ENGLISH   The house had grown and spread beyond all bounds, he had created this department, then that other; he governed that fresh domain, he extended his empire into that industry, the last one conquered; and it was no, always no, in spite of everything.
ENGLISH   Certainly in some things he was rather stupid, but he proved a very good hand in the linen department.
FRENCH   Enfin, il n\'y a que moi, il ne reste plus que moi!  Au bout d\'un silence, il demanda:  -- Et le petit?  -- Il retournera chez Mme Gras, répondit Denise.
ENGLISH   After a pause she abruptly inquired: \"Tell me the truth: does he love her?\"  Denise felt a blush rising to her cheeks.
FRENCH   On y soignait les commis logés dans la maison, lorsqu\'ils ne témoignaient pas le désir de rejoindre leurs familles.
FRENCH   Mêmes ravages en haut, dans les rayons de l\'entresol: les fourrures jonchaient les parquets, les confections s\'amoncelaient comme des capotes de soldats mis hors de combat, les dentelles et la lingerie, dépliées, froissées, jetées au hasard, faisaient songer à un peuple de femmes qui se serait déshabillé là, dans le désordre d\'un coup de désir; tandis que, en bas, au fond de la maison, le service du départ, en pleine activité, dégorgeait toujours les paquets dont il éclatait et qu\'emportaient les voitures, dernier branle de la machine surchauffée.
ENGLISH   \"Nothing to eat when one is starving.\"  The table was rapidly filling.
ENGLISH   As now represented in the engravings of its advertisements, it had grown bigger and bigger, like the ogre of the legend, whose shoulders threatened to pierce the clouds.
ENGLISH   She tried to distinguish the young man among the rowers, but could only manage to make out the white dresses of two women, one of whom, who was steering, wore a red hat.
ENGLISH    \"We would sooner all leave, if he is to be kept,\" declared Hutin.
ENGLISH   The air was getting cooler, some children were laughing in the distance, while trundling their hoops.
ENGLISH   Real Brussels, my dear.
FRENCH   Il finit par me chagriner dans cette boutique noire, où il n\'entre jamais personne.
FRENCH   Aussi tâchait-il d\'embarrasser la cliente, flairant quelque aventure louche, sans doute un bal donné avec les portières, prises au Bonheur, puis renvoyées, afin d\'éviter une location chez un tapissier; il savait que cela se faisait parfois, dans la bourgeoisie économe.
FRENCH   Pour la seconde fois, il lui apparaissait comme un ami inconnu, fraternel et tendre, toujours prêt dans l\'ombre à la sauver.
ENGLISH    At six o\'clock the stock-taking was finished.
ENGLISH   So when I saw a very pretty Valenciennes----\"  Thereupon she at last decided to open her bag; and the ladies were craning their necks, when, amidst the silence, the door-bell was heard.
ENGLISH   At that moment the door had opened and the footman was standing behind her.
ENGLISH    \"I say, Favier,\" murmured Hutin, \"look at the governor up there.
FRENCH    -- Dame! mon cher, répondit Gaujean, il fallait avoir des reins plus solides que les nôtres...
ENGLISH   \"Never fear, it\'s only a joke! The woman who\'ll catch me isn\'t born, my dear fellow!\"  And then, as the shop was opening at last, he rushed off to give a final look at the various departments.
ENGLISH   She placed herself entirely in the hands of Marguerite, who was making her turn round.
ENGLISH   She trembled, divining their inevitable fall; however, she dared not interfere.
ENGLISH   This department but recently organized did not as yet work particularly well.
FRENCH   Gaujean est venu, et ils sont sortis ensemble.
ENGLISH    \"No doubt the idea is attractive,\" said he, \"but it\'s a poet\'s idea.
FRENCH    Un moment, il sembla comparer les visages.
FRENCH   Les paroles de Pauline lui revenaient à la mémoire, elle se rappelait les histoires qui couraient, des vendeuses terrorisées par le père Jouve, achetant sa bienveillance.
ENGLISH   Then one after the other, two other travellers robbed him; a third, an honest man, did no business.
FRENCH    -- Pourquoi avez-vous raconté ça? murmura-t-il enfin d\'une voix douloureuse.
ENGLISH   Upstairs a young lady, dressed in silk, could be espied sharpening a pencil, while two others, beside her, were unfolding some velvet mantles.
FRENCH   Ensuite, il ne savait plus, sa fièvre avait augmenté d\'heure en heure, tout son sang, tout son être s\'était donné.
FRENCH   J\'ai vraiment besoin de m\'asseoir un peu.
ENGLISH   They did not wish it to be rainy for the others, because they themselves might suffer as well; still, if a cloud could only burst over there without a drop falling at Joinville, it would be funny all the same.
ENGLISH   Then those who missed a sale were advised to go to Valognes; in short, she passed for the fool of the place.
FRENCH   Même, dans certains rayons, il passera vingt-cinq et trente fois...
ENGLISH   True, she was too anxious to please the governor to hesitate for a moment, still the application would follow its course, inspector Jouve would go and make inquiries, send in his report, and then she would come to a decision.
FRENCH   Lhomme inscrivait, Joseph dressait une autre liste, pour le contrôle.
ENGLISH   \"Don\'t fail to call about nine o\'clock.
FRENCH    -- Le travail! répéta Vallagnosc avec son flegme ironique.
ENGLISH   Whenever they met, in an out-of-the-way department, they would thus converse for a few minutes, keeping a sharp look-out the while.
ENGLISH   During the short time that she had engaged Mouret\'s attention Clara had profited by the caprice to neglect her work, being of a wonderfully idle, gossiping nature unfitted for any responsible duty.
FRENCH    -- C\'est cette valenciennes pour ma fille, dit-elle.
FRENCH    C\'était fini, Baudu espérait encore qu\'il allait se jeter dans ses bras, en criant: «Père, reposez-vous, nous nous battrons à notre tour, donnez-nous la boutique telle qu\'elle est, pour que nous fassions le miracle de la sauver!» Puis, il le regarda, et il fut pris de honte, il s\'accusa sourdement d\'avoir voulu duper ses enfants.
ENGLISH   Weeks passed away, during which she went to see her uncle nearly every afternoon, escaping from her department for a few minutes and bringing her smiling face and girlish courage to enliven the dark shop.
FRENCH   Un soir, elle allait remonter chez elle, lorsque Deloche, qui la guettait sous une porte cochère, l\'arrêta au passage.
ENGLISH    [1] After all, this is only £12,000 or about a quarter of the amount which a single English firm of soap-manufacturers spends in advertising every year.
ENGLISH   \"How does he manage to play the French horn?\"  Pauline, who sometimes amused herself by playing on her lover\'s stupidity, thereupon told him that the cashier kept the instrument up by leaning it against a wall.
ENGLISH   And to conceal his practice he simply cut off the selvage.
ENGLISH   It was true, she adored Mouret for his youth and his triumphs, never before had any man thus conquered her; but, at the thought of losing him, she also heard the knell of her fortieth year, and asked herself with terror how she should replace this great affection.
FRENCH   Même les démolisseurs attaquèrent la toiture sur sa tête.
ENGLISH    Thus, already at eight o\'clock, The Ladies\' Paradise blazed forth beneath the clear sun-rays in all the glory of its great sale of winter novelties.
FRENCH   si vous espérez que je vais tolérer, dans le sous-sol, des choses si propres.
FRENCH   Puis, après une courte hésitation, il s\'éloigna, il entra aux trousseaux.
FRENCH   Ah! voilà vos frères.
FRENCH    -- Au Bonheur des Dames, lut Jean avec son rire tendre de bel adolescent, qui avait eu déjà une histoire de femme à Valognes.
FRENCH   Sans attendre, elle lui recommanda Bouthemont, le donna comme un gaillard qui allait à son tour révolutionner Paris, en s\'établissant à son compte.
FRENCH   Enfin, quand Bourras se calma un peu, elle résolut de faire la commission de Mouret; sans doute, le vieillard était irrité, mais l\'excès même de sa colère, l\'impasse où il se trouvait, pouvaient déterminer une acceptation brusque.
FRENCH   Deloche les quitta sur la place de la Bastille; comme tous les jeunes gens au pair, il couchait au magasin, où il devait être à onze heures.
ENGLISH   For the last few weeks Jean had been very grave, as if tormented by some worry.
ENGLISH    \"Always some injustice here!\" muttered Clara, furiously.
FRENCH   Le blessé, que son émotion épuisait, venait encore de perdre connaissance.
FRENCH   Une faible rougeur avait coloré les joues de Mme de Boves, que sa gêne réduite aux expédients enrageait; tandis que Mme Marty, au contraire, approuvait, prise de remords, en songeant à son pauvre mari.
ENGLISH   You know in what a shameful manner Madame Frédéric has left us.
FRENCH   Voilà où les idées nouvelles peuvent conduire.
FRENCH    -- Mais il n\'a qu\'un bras! dit tout à coup Baugé.
FRENCH   Mme Aurélie la regardait de ses grands yeux fixes, sans qu\'un pli de son masque d\'empereur daignât s\'attendrir.
FRENCH    -- Laissez donc, une plaisanterie! La femme qui me prendra n\'est pas née, mon cher!  Et, comme les magasins ouvraient enfin, il se précipita pour donner un dernier coup d\'oeil aux divers comptoirs.
ENGLISH   Nothing then remained but to check and pack them, which was done in a neighbouring room by a squad of workmen who were nailing and tying up from morning to night.
FRENCH   Et dis-moi, maintenant qu\'on peut causer, pourquoi ne t\'es-tu pas mariée, à Valognes?  Denise lâcha son verre qu\'elle portait à sa bouche.
ENGLISH   But as he annoyed them and made them feel uncomfortable, they all hastened to get away.
ENGLISH   She, much moved, bent down, pretending to arrange Pépé\'s belt.
ENGLISH   Madame Robineau embraced her, deeply affected, and declaring that she should always miss her.
FRENCH   Elle se doutait bien que cette dame était Mme Aurélie; mais, inquiétée par les éclats de sa voix, elle restait debout, elle attendait toujours.
ENGLISH   The setting sun was tinging the roofs of the white houses with yellow, the blue sky was growing paler, refreshed by a pure breeze; whilst in the twilight, which was already enveloping the side-walks down below, the electric lamps of The Ladies\' Paradise threw forth the fixed glimmer of stars, lighted on the horizon at the decline of day.
FRENCH   La question d\'argent était plus grave.
ENGLISH   Out of the four hundred employees, Bourdoncle had already sacked fifty, and there were rumours of fresh executions.
FRENCH   La vaste pièce, entourée de ces glaces et de ces boiseries de chêne sculpté, garnie d\'une moquette rouge à grands ramages, ressemblait au salon banal d\'un hôtel, que traverse un continuel galop de passants.
ENGLISH    \"Understand, Monsieur Hutin!\" cried Mouret, \"I have never tolerated these attempts at independence.
FRENCH   Et il aurait joint les deux mains, pour lui demander pardon de blasphémer, dans ses heures de révolte.
ENGLISH   No doubt she was relating that the young girl had been weeping that morning.
FRENCH   Ensuite, vous pouvez vendre les autres articles aussi cher qu\'ailleurs, elles croiront les payer chez vous meilleur marché.
FRENCH   On les suivait des yeux, on souriait de ces deux grands gaillards filant sur les pas de cette fille mince et grave, Jean effaré avec sa barbe, Pépé éperdu dans sa tunique, tous les trois du même blond aujourd\'hui, un blond qui faisait chuchoter sur leur passage, d\'un bout à l\'autre des comptoirs:  -- Ce sont ses frères...
ENGLISH   \"Wretches!\" said she, banging the door after her.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! dit Pauline, c\'est M.
FRENCH   Il y avait des mois qu\'il brûlait ainsi, sur le trottoir d\'en face, sans trouver le courage de se déclarer; et cela pour une fille libre, qui demeurait rue Louis-le-Grand, qu\'il aurait pu aborder, avant qu\'elle s\'en allât chaque soir au bras d\'un nouvel homme! Clara elle-même ne paraissait pas se douter de sa conquête.
FRENCH   Puis, c\'étaient les bâtiments eux-mêmes, d\'une immensité exagérée, vus à vol d\'oiseau avec leurs corps de toitures qui dessinaient les galeries couvertes, leurs cours vitrées où l\'on devinait les halls, tout l\'infini de ce lac de verre et de zinc luisant au soleil.
ENGLISH    \"What! It\'s you! what\'s the matter?\"  Her brother Jean was standing before her, a parcel in his hand.
ENGLISH   He was thoroughly annihilated, and had not even the strength left him to get angry.
ENGLISH    \"Really,\" he repeated, \"you think them well-behaved?\"  Mouret defended their conduct with a conviction which made Vallagnosc smile.
FRENCH    IV   Ce lundi-là, le dix Octobre, un clair soleil de victoire perça les nuées grises, qui depuis une semaine assombrissaient Paris.
ENGLISH   Such was the rule of the house--a clean sweep was made every year, they sold at sixty per cent.
ENGLISH   \"Monsieur Mouret was joking,\" said she.
ENGLISH   Jean went on as badly as ever, always worrying her for money.
FRENCH   Mouret ne lui adressait plus la parole.
FRENCH   Vous n\'avez raconté que la vérité.
ENGLISH   Now I want a mantle for this young lady.\"  Denise had been obliged to assist in serving as the customers had besieged her department in great force.
ENGLISH   Madame Baudu, ceasing to interfere, sat motionless on her chair; Geneviève and Colomban, with eyes cast down, were picking up and eating the crumbs off the table, just for the sake of something to do.
FRENCH   Naturellement, quand j\'ai vu une valenciennes très jolie...
ENGLISH   \"Who could have expected such a thing? That fellow was walking along quite at home and when I called out to him he at once threw himself under the wheels!\"  Then a house-painter, who had run up, brush in hand, from a neighbouring shop-front, exclaimed in a sharp voice, amidst the clamour: \"Don\'t excite yourself! I saw him, he threw himself under! He jumped in, head first, like that.
ENGLISH   Whilst working, he would continually assail The Ladies\' Paradise; never weary of explaining how affairs stood in the terrible duel between that bazaar and himself.
FRENCH   Imaginez-vous, en venant vous voir, je suis entrée au Bonheur, et comme j\'ai encore fait des folies, je n\'ai pas voulu laisser ceci en bas, dans mon fiacre, de peur d\'être volée.
ENGLISH   With a frank air, and open face, he was giving his word of honour, with the facility of a man whom assurances never troubled.
ENGLISH    Mouret shrugged his shoulders, without replying.
FRENCH    Elle ne trouvait que ces mots, et lui suffoqua, se confessa dans une crise de remords, en la voyant ainsi agenouillée, renversée, avec son ventre de mère qui s\'écrasait contre le brancard.
FRENCH    Le rayon des soieries était comme une grande chambre d\'amour, drapée de blanc par un caprice d\'amoureuse à la nudité de neige, voulant lutter de blancheur.
ENGLISH    \"For myself,\" said Madame de Boves, \"I don\'t know any creatures who are more disagreeable.
FRENCH   Était-ce idiot, de tomber à l\'amour d\'un homme de peine, quand on était marquise! Et elle lui jalousait cet amour.
FRENCH   Enfin, tout en haut, l\'entablement s\'épanouissait comme la floraison ardente de la façade entière, les mosaïques et les faïences reparaissaient avec des colorations plus chaudes, le zinc des chéneaux était découpé et doré, l\'acrotère alignait un peuple de statues, les grandes cités industrielles et manufacturières, qui détachaient en plein ciel leurs fines silhouettes.
FRENCH   Mais, je le répète, c\'est impossible, mes frères m\'attendent ce soir.
FRENCH   Elle avait revu Mouret, tout se trouvait réglé.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, demanda Mouret, que deviens-tu?  -- Mais je ne deviens rien.
FRENCH   Elle continuait avec une gaieté forcée, elle racontait qu\'elle avait acheté cette confection au Bonheur des Dames, la semaine précédente.
FRENCH   Pourtant, les voix baissèrent, on signalait l\'approche de l\'inspecteur, et c\'était inutile de mettre la direction dans la querelle.
ENGLISH   At all events if the managers closed their eyes to the terrible doings of their employees out of doors, they did not tolerate the least nonsense in the house.
ENGLISH   You are not used to figures.\"  Mademoiselle de Fontenailles got up, and returned to the department, where she was greeted with whispering.
FRENCH   Hutin, monsieur.
FRENCH    -- Quatre-vingt mille francs! répétait Bourras.
FRENCH   Lentement, les salles se vidaient, les vendeurs remontaient à leurs rayons, en traînant le long des marches.
ENGLISH   But there was little doing there, the customers were but few and far between.
FRENCH   Un souffle humide, l\'haleine du vieux quartier, venait de la rue; il semblait que le ruissellement des parapluies coulât jusqu\'aux comptoirs, que le pavé avec sa boue et ses flaques entrât, achevât de moisir l\'antique rez-de-chaussée, blanc de salpêtre.
FRENCH   Quand elle revint, elle trouva, planté devant le Bonheur des Dames, un grand garçon, blême et dégingandé, qui, depuis un quart d\'heure, semblait attendre comme elle.
FRENCH    Et Denise, ayant hâte de n\'être plus sous les regards de tous ces hommes, disait merci et tournait de nouveau le dos à l\'escalier, lorsque Hutin céda naturellement à son instinct de galanterie.
ENGLISH   Besides, if he had been foolish enough to close The Ladies\' Paradise, another great establishment would have sprung up of itself next door, for the idea was now starting from the four corners of the globe; the triumph of these manufacturing and trading centres was sown by the spirit of the age, which was sweeping away the falling edifices of ancient times.
FRENCH    Il avait changé son trajet, il marchait de la salle à manger aux vitrines de la devanture; et, maintenant, il considérait chaque fois d\'un regard morne ces vitrines lamentables, avec leur étalage oublié.
FRENCH   C\'est la mode de cette année.
FRENCH   Il se lança tout d\'un coup.
ENGLISH   Denise, the first down, was opening her eyes with astonishment, quite bewildered by the new arrangements.
FRENCH   Et lui gardait son calme de conquérant, au milieu des odeurs troublantes qui montaient de leurs chevelures.
ENGLISH   Wasn\'t that fair? He never higgled, he gave whatever money was required; but in return he expected people to be reasonable, and allow him to finish his work! Did any one ever try to stop engines on a railway? To all this Denise listened with drooping eyes, unable on her side to find any but purely sentimental reasons.
ENGLISH   \"She wanted to come with me, you know.
FRENCH   Continuellement, elles sillonnaient Paris, conduites avec correction par des cochers vêtus de noir, promenant l\'enseigne d\'or et de pourpre du Bonheur des Dames.
ENGLISH   Then Denise in order to avoid this feverish curiosity, and thinking, moreover, that it was not right to leave the shop open, decided to let the metal shutters down.
ENGLISH    \"Here you are, then!\" said Baudu.
ENGLISH    During the first two months she had a terribly hard time of it.
FRENCH   Cependant, Mme Marty semblait agitée d\'une sourde inquiétude.
FRENCH   Un fabricant de colle, te l\'ai-je dit? des gens extrêmement bien...
FRENCH   Quelques gouttes avaient éclaboussé les voisins de Favier, dont les cheveux seuls se trouvaient mouillés légèrement: le vin, lancé d\'une main trop rude, était allé tomber de l\'autre côté de la table.
ENGLISH   I can understand such obstinate old men as Bourras and Baudu standing out; but for you and I, who are young, who had accepted the new style of things, it was wrong! No, Gaujean, it\'s the last of a world.\"  They carried him off.
FRENCH    Mais, pendant que Denise cherchait un vendeur, il y eut une rencontre.
FRENCH    L\'oncle Baudu l\'avait dit, le petit commerce des rues voisines recevait encore un coup terrible.
ENGLISH   There was no room to turn round in the shop, it was so small.
ENGLISH   Then, as Denise was taking the cloak to effect the \"return\" herself, she protested, and called an auxiliary.
FRENCH   C\'est très mal.
ENGLISH   To be near her, within the beloved perfume of her presence, to have her ready to convince them both with a smile, seemed to him a certain guarantee of success.
ENGLISH   The Robineaus were not at all particular before them, but freely talked of the business whilst at table in the back-shop, which looked on to a large yard.
FRENCH   Lui, pris du sourd remords de ne l\'avoir pas secourue, songeait peut-être à la vie de misère qu\'elle venait de traverser.
FRENCH    Pauline eut un bon rire.
ENGLISH   \"We can meet Madame de Boves again in the reading-room.\"  \"Very good,\" replied the latter.
ENGLISH   No one here would be offended, would they?\"  \"Oh, no!\" murmured Madame Baudu.
ENGLISH   Do you know that my manager in the silk department will draw more than twelve thousand francs this year.
ENGLISH   Besides, we are more than five hundred yards away, whilst Vabre was almost next door to The Paradise.\"  Gaujean, the silk manufacturer, then chimed in, and their voices fell again.
FRENCH   Avez- vous du foulard pour des matinées?  Elle espérait obtenir de lui le nom de la demoiselle, prise du besoin de la voir.
FRENCH   Mais que vous êtes donc enfant de vous chagriner ainsi! Est-ce malheureux d\'être si sensible! Pardi! ce qui vous arrive, arrive à toutes: on vous fait payer la bienvenue.
FRENCH    -- De quoi donc avez-vous peur?  Mais elle relevait déjà la tête, elle le regardait en face, et elle dit, en souriant de son air doux et brave:  -- Je n\'ai peur de rien, monsieur...
ENGLISH   Between two button-holes of their dress bodies they all wore a long pencil, with its point in the air; and protruding from their pockets, you could see the white leaves of a book of debit-notes.
FRENCH   Lentement, ses yeux pâlissaient, envahis de ténèbres, et lorsqu\'ils s\'éteignirent dans la mort, ils restèrent grands ouverts, regardant toujours, noyés de grosses larmes.
FRENCH   Si papa était mort, ce que je les planterais là...! Mais une chose qui m\'exaspère, ce sont les sept mille francs de ce bout de femme.
ENGLISH   The air-holes placed at intervals admitted a pale light; while in the dark corners, and along the narrow corridors, gas was constantly burning.
FRENCH   C\'est elle qui est venue...
FRENCH   Favier, nommé second, mangeait le premier, afin de le déloger de sa place.
ENGLISH    They slowly crossed the basement floor.
FRENCH   Mais Hutin avait pour intime Liénard.
ENGLISH   \"We are all going, you know.
ENGLISH   I assure you I intended to say something else.
ENGLISH   He doesn\'t seem to be enjoying himself.\"  \"Oh! this is a rotten shop!\" replied Favier.
ENGLISH   Was it then really true that it was necessary for the world to fatten on death, that it was necessary there should be this struggle for existence whereby humanity drew even increase of life from the ossuaries of eternal destruction? And afterwards she again found herself before the grave into which they had lowered Geneviève, and then she perceived her uncle and aunt alone in their gloomy dining-room.
FRENCH   De simples fiacres se mêlaient aux coupés de maître, les cochers attendaient parmi les roues, les rangées de chevaux hennissaient, secouaient les étincelles de leurs gourmettes, allumées de soleil.
FRENCH    Il avait repris sa marche, son pas ébranlait de nouveau le vide sépulcral de la maison.
ENGLISH   She had entered the linen-gallery in order to get to the handkerchief counter, which was at the further end.
ENGLISH    \"What! it\'s you?\" she murmured, quite pale.
FRENCH    Cette nuit-là, Denise ne dormit guère.
FRENCH   Mais, dans ses yeux clairs, cette débâcle de marchandises qui tombait chez lui, ce flot qui lâchait des milliers de francs à la minute, mettait une courte flamme.
ENGLISH   He stood close to them, listening to the baron, who, with the air of an old man who had seen life, was muttering: \"I say, I fancy they\'re taking their revenge.\"  \"Who?\" asked Mouret in embarrassment.
FRENCH    -- C\'est bien, mon oncle, finit-elle par dire péniblement.
FRENCH   Lui qui ne tolérait pas une peccadille à ses vendeuses, qui les jetait sur le pavé au moindre caprice, se trouvait réduit à supplier une d\'elles de ne pas partir, de ne pas l\'abandonner dans sa misère.
ENGLISH   In all haste he ran upstairs to his rooms, washed himself and changed his clothes, and when he at last seated himself at his table, in his private office on the first floor, he was at his ease and full of strength, with bright eyes and cool skin, as ready for work as if he had enjoyed ten hours\' sleep.
ENGLISH   There were also metallic flowers, silver thistles and silver ears of corn.
FRENCH   Renfoncez ça, autrement on vous en fera bien d\'autres...
ENGLISH   Then when, in answer to a question, the young girl acknowledged that she was going back to Mouret\'s, Robineau turned pale.
FRENCH    Denise écoutait, en silence.
FRENCH   D\'un comptoir à l\'autre, les commérages soufflaient plus fort, au travers du flot sans cesse épaissi des clientes.
FRENCH   Elle avait dû remarquer les yeux rouges de la jeune fille, car elle l\'examinait à la dérobée.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle, however, forgetting that he himself belonged to the establishment, likewise congratulated the governor in order to make him forget his anxious doubts and persecutions of the earlier part of the day.
FRENCH   Et il poussait en avant sa poitrine, où s\'étalait son ruban rouge.
ENGLISH   reduction.
FRENCH    -- Non, je veux celui-ci, j\'en ai besoin tout de suite, reprit- elle avec vivacité.
ENGLISH   Yes, I have to stay up all night at work.
ENGLISH   Such lodgers as did any cooking were obliged to kneel before the fire-place, where there was an earthenware stove.
ENGLISH   But all at once near by she perceived the saleswoman of the under-clothing department, who had already defended her that morning.
ENGLISH   Those fellows were right--what right had he to defend her? They would now think all sorts of villainous things: he could have killed himself for having thus compromised her, in attempting to prove her innocence.
ENGLISH   Pépé, who so far had been very good, behaved rather badly at the sight of the jam; whilst Jean, his attention attracted by the conversation about his cousin Geneviève\'s marriage, began to take stock of the girl, whom he thought too puny and too pale, comparing her in his own mind to a little white rabbit with black ears and pink eyes.
FRENCH    Le lendemain, justement, elle eut à sourire, à jouer son rôle de fille bien mise.
ENGLISH   And, I say, now that we can talk a bit, tell us why you didn\'t get married at Valognes?\"  At this Denise almost dropped the glass she held in her hand.
ENGLISH   The whole neighbourhood complains of it, every small tradesman is beginning to suffer terribly.
ENGLISH   She smiled, hoping that he would come down and extricate her.
ENGLISH   This dog\'s life made the best of them bad; and the sad work of destruction commenced: they were all devoured by the business before the age of forty, often disappearing, falling into unknown depths, a great many dying in harness, some of consumption and exhaustion, others of fatigue and bad air, whilst a few were thrown on the street, and the happiest married and buried themselves in some little provincial shop.
ENGLISH   \"I never ought to have kept a lot of rotten articles, at one franc nineteen sous! That\'s where these new notions lead one to.
ENGLISH   Madame Marty bought a dress she did not need, pretending it to be a bargain; Madame Bourdelais also thought the silk very fine, but preferred waiting, guessing no doubt what would happen.
ENGLISH   But all at once they heard a commotion in the other room, a burst of voices which drowned all others.
ENGLISH   He, tortured, listened to her, repeating in a passionate tone: \"I wish it.
FRENCH    1.D.
FRENCH   Et le nombre des lettres croissait tellement, qu\'on ne les comptait plus; on les pesait, il en arrivait jusqu\'à cent livres par jour.
FRENCH   Cependant, Bourdoncle regardait le teint de Pauline se plomber, tandis qu\'il lui trouvait une raideur dans la démarche.
FRENCH    La jeune fille ne répondit pas, étudiant du regard, obstinément, une cassure de la toile, comme envahie tout entière par les réflexions qui continuaient en elle.
FRENCH   Toujours ils s\'engraissaient, ils étaient maintenant mille employés, ils annonçaient vingt-huit rayons.
FRENCH   Non, voyez-vous, Gaujean, c\'est la fin d\'un monde.
FRENCH    -- Bonsoir, ma tante, dit Denise.
ENGLISH   And all around them other shopmen were likewise adding up figures, glowing with the same fever, in the brutal gaiety which follows victorious carnage.
FRENCH   Quelque chose de virginal!  M.
ENGLISH   For the last month, however, they had been spending three evenings a week at a free-and-easy at Montmartre; whither they would take their friends in order to fan the success of Mademoiselle Laure, a music-hall singer, Hutin\'s latest conquest, whose talent they applauded with such violent rapping of their walking-sticks and such clamorous shouts that on two occasions the police had been obliged to interfere.
ENGLISH   The latter, a fine man, wearing a moustache and an imperial in the correct military fashion so much liked at the Tuileries, kissed the hand of Madame Desforges, whom he had known as a young girl at her father\'s.
FRENCH    -- Madame, vint demander à ce moment Denise, seriez-vous assez bonne pour me permettre de me retirer? Je ne sers plus à rien, à cause de ma jambe, et comme je dois dîner chez mon oncle, avec mes frères...
FRENCH   Il lâchait les passions, mettait les forces en présence, laissait les gros manger les petits, et s\'engraissait de cette bataille des intérêts.
FRENCH   La phrase était partie sans qu\'il le voulût, dans l\'explosion d\'une longue rancune amassée.
FRENCH   Du reste, je vous rendrai ce papier, dès que vous m\'apporterez deux mille francs pour les pauvres.
FRENCH    -- Monsieur, vous avez désiré me voir, dit-elle de son air calme.
ENGLISH   And, totally abandoned, assailed in her most cherished feelings of modesty, indignant at such injustice, she was obliged to stifle the sobs which were rising in her throat.
ENGLISH   Really, I should advise you to criticize others!\"  They both stood looking at one another, face to face, and trembling.
ENGLISH   Visions of the East floated before you at sight of all the luxury of this barbarous art, amid the strong odour which the old wool retained of the land of vermin and of the rising sun.
FRENCH   L\'idée qu\'il la tuait et qu\'il mangeait la part de Pépé, le bouleversa tellement, qu\'il se mit à pleurer.
ENGLISH    \"Those red parasols are really too comical; I must buy one,\" said Madame Marty all at once, stamping with impatience at doing nothing.
FRENCH    -- Vraiment, répétait-il en tâchant de montrer un air naïf, vous leur livrerez la rue toute faite, avec les égouts, les trottoirs, les becs de gaz? Et les terrains en bordure suffiront pour vous indemniser? Oh! c\'est curieux, très curieux!  Enfin, il arriva au point délicat.
FRENCH   Des glaces resplendissaient.
FRENCH   Moi, je suis un passionné, je ne prends pas la vie tranquillement, c\'est ce qui m\'y intéresse peut-être.
FRENCH    -- Êtes-vous remise, ma chère? On ne se rencontre plus.
FRENCH   Elle disait non, toujours non.
FRENCH   À Paris, j\'ai toujours été un souffre-douleur.
ENGLISH   But the baron maliciously reverted to the young ladies in the big establishments.
FRENCH   Les deux rayons, qui se touchaient, étaient en continuelle hostilité; mais ces demoiselles s\'entendaient parfois pour se moquer des gens.
FRENCH   Il l\'attendait debout.
ENGLISH   \"You must be reasonable, my boy.
FRENCH    Il était excellent.
ENGLISH   Oh! I know what I say, the old style of business may go and join the white roses they\'re throwing on her coffin.\"  Denise brought her uncle and brother back in a mourning coach.
FRENCH   Le terrible Bourdoncle la traitait maintenant en sabot, en femme perdue pour le commerce.
FRENCH    -- Qu\'allez-vous faire de vos terrains et de vos immeubles? demandait-il avec insistance.
ENGLISH    That Saturday, just as a footman was about to introduce him into the principal drawing-room, Mouret from the anteroom perceived, through an open doorway, Madame Desforges crossing the smaller salon.
ENGLISH   The ladies were now all anxious to see what Madame Marty had bought.
FRENCH   Les vendeurs, harassés de fatigue, campaient parmi la débâcle de leurs casiers et de leurs comptoirs, que paraissait avoir saccagés le souffle furieux d\'un ouragan.
FRENCH    -- Vraiment! une belle soie à cinq francs soixante! dit Mme Bourdelais enthousiasmée.
FRENCH    Mais Mouret haussa les épaules, dans un mouvement d\'écrasant dédain.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, les autres avaient beau cracher sur les plats, ils se gavaient tout de même.
ENGLISH   The private life of the saleswomen was now becoming more refined and elegant; they displayed a taste for scented soap and fine linen, quite a natural ascent towards middle-class ways as their positions improved, although high words and banging doors were still sometimes heard amidst the hotel-like gust that carried them away, morning and evening.
FRENCH   Et sa déférence pour une femme apportant de telles sommes dans le ménage, s\'élargissait jusqu\'à son fils, qui venait d\'elle.
ENGLISH   The newspapers were full of details--the fire breaking out through an explosion of gas during the night, the hurried flight of the frightened saleswomen in their night-dresses, and the heroic conduct of Bouthemont, who had carried five of them out on his shoulders.
FRENCH   Il avait la voix dure, les gestes fous, et les mères du quartier terrifiaient leurs marmots en menaçant de l\'envoyer chercher, comme on envoie chercher les gendarmes.
FRENCH    Le lendemain, lorsque Denise monta voir à l\'infirmerie Pauline, qui avait dû s\'aliter à la suite du coup reçu, celle-ci l\'embrassa violemment sur les deux joues.
ENGLISH   And thus they rested on their positions, face to face, with the massacre of their goods around them.
FRENCH    Le comte ne put retenir un sursaut, en jetant un regard oblique sur Mme Guibal.
ENGLISH    \"The shop is left to take care of itself,\" she said at last, rising from table, in order to put an end to the scene.
FRENCH   Vous êtes les bienvenus.
ENGLISH   Sometimes it was a two-franc piece he wanted to enable him to escape some woman\'s jealousy, at other times five francs, six francs, to get some poor girl out of a scrape as her father would otherwise kill her.
ENGLISH   The bright satins and soft-tinted silks--the Reine and Renaissance satins with the pearly tones of spring water; the light silks, Nile-green, Indian-azure, May-pink, and Danube-blue all of crystalline transparency--flowed forth above.
FRENCH    -- Vous savez la nouvelle? lui dit un soir le marchand de parapluies, comme elle rentrait.
ENGLISH   The injured man, exhausted by emotion, had just fainted away again.
ENGLISH   She was childish enough, before unpacking her box, to put on her old woollen gown, which hung over the back of a chair.
FRENCH   Qui est-ce?  -- Oh! personne, répondit Mme Desforges de sa voix mauvaise.
ENGLISH   In short, Robineau was the one to blame, for he ought to have dissuaded her, he, an old hand, knowing the ways of the house.
ENGLISH    Nine o\'clock struck as Denise came down, leaning on Madame Aurélie\'s arm.
ENGLISH   He acknowledged himself vanquished; she was as intelligent as she was beautiful, her intelligence came from the best part of her being.
FRENCH   Et ce fut surtout à la ganterie que la tempête éclata, sur la tête d\'un des rares Parisiens de la maison, le joli Mignot, ainsi qu\'on l\'appelait, bâtard déclassé d\'une maîtresse de harpe: son crime était d\'avoir fait un scandale au réfectoire, en se plaignant de la nourriture.
ENGLISH   But he gradually recovered, and began shouting out once more.
FRENCH    Elle se reprit, elle bégaya:  -- Oui, je suis chargée de vous offrir une place d\'inspecteur.
FRENCH    Un soir, Denise n\'avait pas même de pain pour la soupe de Pépé, lorsqu\'un monsieur décoré s\'était mis à la suivre.
FRENCH    Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
ENGLISH   They offered me twelve thousand francs for my good-will, and eighteen thousand francs for the last ten years of my lease; in all thirty thousand.
ENGLISH   There, amidst masons laying the huge corner-stones, and engineers setting up the great iron framework, he found a refuge against his torments.
ENGLISH   As Marguerite was sharpening her pencil while waiting for customers, she said to her, in a loud voice:  \"You know my admirer opposite.
FRENCH   Et elle jetait, sur un comptoir, les manteaux ordinaires, d\'un geste qui signifiait: «Voyez donc, est-ce pauvre!» Mme Marty n\'osait les trouver bien.
FRENCH   Elle préféra ce voyage, malgré les ténèbres qui noyaient les galeries.
ENGLISH   Turkey, Arabia, Persia and the Indies were all there.
FRENCH    -- Campion, dit Mouret au chef du départ, un ancien sergent à figure maigre, pourquoi six paires de draps, achetées hier par une dame vers deux heures, n\'ont-elles pas été portées le soir?  -- Où demeure cette dame? demanda l\'employé.
ENGLISH   It hurts me in the bosom, and in the head; then it spreads everywhere, it\'s killing me.\"  Her eyes filled with tears.
ENGLISH   And amidst the groups pressing close to the counters, inspector Jouve slowly walked about with his military air, displaying his decoration and watching over all the fine and precious goods, so easy to conceal up a sleeve.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s two minutes\' walk,\" explained Baudu as he went down the Rue Gaillon with his niece: \"Vinçard has a silk business, and still does a fair trade.
ENGLISH    \"This way, madame,\" said Denise without a murmur, after each halt.
ENGLISH   Being now in much better circumstances she indulged in sundry little luxuries, a red eider-down bed quilt, covered with guipure, a small carpet in front of her wardrobe, a couple of blue-glass vases containing a few fading roses on her toilet table.
ENGLISH   What style of mantle? But the lady had no idea, she wished to see what the house had got.
ENGLISH   These little ones are ruining me!\"  Denise, now being able to slip off, went to listen to Jean\'s explanations, and then accompanied him to the various counters, where he would certainly have lost his head without her.
ENGLISH   He speculated on every sentiment, created special departments for little boys and girls, and waylaid the passing mothers with distributions of chromo-lithographs and air-balls for the children.
FRENCH   Il n\'osait refuser pourtant, il cherchait une pièce de dix francs, dans son porte-monnaie, lorsque Mme Aurélie, étonnée de ne plus entendre la voix de Marguerite, qui avait dû s\'interrompre, aperçut Mignot et comprit.
FRENCH   D\'autres employés écrivaient, Albert Lhomme aidait ces messieurs, le teint brouillé par une nuit blanche, passée dans un bastringue de la Chapelle.
FRENCH   Lorsque Denise faisait acte de force, sans élever le ton, pas une ne résistait.
ENGLISH   This house now belonged to the firm of Mouret & Co., and as the lease stipulated that the tenant should submit to all necessary repairs, the workmen one morning appeared on the scene.
FRENCH   Sans doute on devait en avoir dédoublé quelques-uns, mais d\'autres étaient complètement nouveaux: par exemple un rayon de meubles et un rayon d\'articles de Paris.
FRENCH   Elle ne voulait pas être exploitée par eux, c\'était elle qui profitait de leurs véritables occasions.
FRENCH   Mme Desforges aurait pu continuer sa marche, pour libérer Denise plus vite; mais elle semblait heureuse de la sentir derrière elle, immobile et patiente, tandis qu\'elle s\'attardait également, à conseiller son amie.
ENGLISH   Madame de Boves repeated her question, and as they dismissed her with an affirmative nod, she enveloped both of them in a murderous glance.
ENGLISH    \"You seem worried,\" said Pauline, meeting her one day in the furniture gallery, looking very pale.
ENGLISH   That lady was surely very ill-natured to attack a poor girl who had said nothing; and as for Mouret, he most decidedly filled her with a freezing fear, in which all her other sentiments disappeared.
ENGLISH   But all at once he again smiled, having just perceived Madame Desforges and Madame Guibal slowly crossing the department.
ENGLISH   As he passed along Mouret glanced at the heating apparatus which was to be lighted on the following Monday for the first time, and at the firemen guarding a giant gas-meter enclosed in an iron cage.
ENGLISH   There could be no deceit, no long prepared stroke of fortune by selling an article at double its value; there were simply current operations, a regular percentage levied on all goods, and success depended solely on the skilful working of the sales which became the larger from the very circumstance that they were carried on openly and honestly.
FRENCH   Derrière Hutin, il y avait Favier, puis derrière Favier, les autres, à la file.
FRENCH   Et l\'effet du fléau, de cette peste, se fait sentir jusqu\'à la rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs, où je me suis laissé dire que MM.
ENGLISH   When he raised his head again he found himself in the new millinery department, the windows of which overlooked the Rue du Dix-Décembre.
FRENCH   Quand elle rencontrait le regard sévère de Bourdoncle pendant le service, elle était prise d\'un tremblement, car elle sentait en lui un ennemi naturel, qui ne lui pardonnerait pas la plus légère faute.
FRENCH    Denise les donna, puis resta les yeux levés.
FRENCH    -- Ça paraît vouloir s\'allumer un peu, dit Hutin à Favier.
ENGLISH   The young women also joked about Madame Frédéric, declaring that she was discreetly connected with certain great personages; but the truth was they knew nothing of her love-affairs; for she disappeared every evening, stiff as starch with her widow\'s sulkiness, and apparently always in a great hurry, though nobody knew whither she hastened so eagerly.
ENGLISH   In short, his position at The Ladies\' Paradise, like that of all the managers, was that of a special tradesman, in a grouping of various businesses, a sort of vast trading city.
ENGLISH   Grognet, the perfumer in the Rue de Grammont can clear out, and I wouldn\'t give ten francs for Naud\'s boot-shop in the Rue d\'Antin.
FRENCH   Les escaliers de fer, à double révolution, développaient des courbes hardies, multipliaient les paliers; les ponts de fer, jetés sur le vide, filaient droit, très haut; et tout ce fer mettait là, sous la lumière blanche des vitrages, une architecture légère, une dentelle compliquée où passait le jour, la réalisation moderne d\'un palais du rêve, d\'une Babel entassant des étages, élargissant des salles, ouvrant des échappées sur d\'autres étages et d\'autres salles, à l\'infini.
FRENCH   Il ne leur restait que Geneviève.
FRENCH   Denise, qui depuis le matin promenait ainsi des clientes, tombait de lassitude; mais elle restait correcte, avec sa douceur polie.
ENGLISH   There\'s nothing in me to make you love me.
FRENCH    Alors elle s\'assit sur un banc: et, comme il était las, l\'enfant s\'endormit en travers de ses genoux.
FRENCH   Pas pour cinquante mille! Je les tiens, je veux les voir lécher la terre devant moi!  -- Trente mille francs, c\'est beau, reprenait Denise.
ENGLISH   \"There! Just tuck that in behind your ear,\" he said, \"The chignon is too high.\"  She did not speak, but let him arrange her hair.
ENGLISH   Robineau, nervous as a woman, was intolerably stiff and susceptible.
FRENCH   Et les petits?  Elle finit par rire, tant l\'idée lui semblait baroque.
ENGLISH    Although Madame Frédéric had never confided in any one, she was suspected of having relinquished her position to marry the proprietor of some baths in the neighbourhood of the Halles.
FRENCH   Comme elle refusait de la tête, il continua:  -- Des gants du Tyrol à un franc vingt-cinq...
FRENCH   Mais, dans le trouble où cette visite imprévue la mettait, elle n\'avait pas lâché le soulier qu\'elle était en train de recoudre; et les yeux de Pauline tombèrent sur ce soulier.
FRENCH   Dans les soies de fantaisie, il y a des dispositions charmantes, des dessins choisis entre mille par notre acheteur; et, comme velours, vous trouverez la plus riche collection de nuances...
ENGLISH    \"If all the aristocratic ladies who patronize us were to proclaim it,\" he retorted gaily, \"you would be astonished by the names of our customers.
ENGLISH   At first, they looked at each other without saying a word.
FRENCH   Je n\'avais pas dix ans que je gagnais ma vie.
FRENCH   Tout de même elle avait eu raison de refuser, pour le soir, une invitation à dîner de l\'oncle Baudu, et de prier sa tante de faire sortir Pépé, qu\'elle avait remis en pension chez Mme Gras.
FRENCH    Justement, elle parut à la porte du petit salon, suivie d\'un vieillard, âgé d\'environ soixante ans, dont les deux amis n\'avaient pas remarqué l\'entrée.
FRENCH   Des cuisiniers, tout blancs dans le rouge sombre de la fonte, surveillaient le pot-au-feu du soir, montés sur des échelles de fer, armés d\'écumoires, au bout de grands bâtons.
ENGLISH   His smile lost its touch of irony and he glanced at the young man, gradually won over by the confidence he displayed and feeling a growing friendship for him.
ENGLISH    [1] This is at the present day the Rue du Quatre Septembre.
ENGLISH   He laid his glass down again awkwardly enough and commenced sucking the leaves of the artichoke which he had already eaten.
ENGLISH   Deloche and he were now constantly together.
ENGLISH   Yes, some door-curtains which I don\'t like.
ENGLISH   The other young ladies spoke of this at first as an injustice, and even added a lot of abominable accusations.
ENGLISH   He found, in the delivery department, the sorting tables already littered with heaps of parcels, band-boxes, and cases which were continually arriving in large hampers; and Campion, the superintendent, gave him particulars about the current work, whilst the twenty men placed under his orders distributed the parcels among large compartments, each of which bore the name of a district of Paris, and whence the messengers took them up to the vans waiting beside the foot pavement.
FRENCH   Tout de suite Hutin devina la femme qui n\'achèterait pas.
ENGLISH   Madame Marty likewise was giving way, repeating the while: \"Keep hold of my dress, Valentine.
ENGLISH   Heavens! he had tried to kill himself.
FRENCH   On se taisait, on mangeait des haricots verts de conserve; et elle finit par se risquer à dire d\'un air gai.
FRENCH    -- Mais rien, assura celle-ci, avec un sourire embarrassé.
ENGLISH   Little by little, however, he succeeded in learning Paul\'s story.
FRENCH    -- Mademoiselle, on vous demande à la direction.
ENGLISH   Oh! a quarrel that he had not even yet got over, for he had left the meeting beside himself with rage.
FRENCH   Cette idée d\'avoir de la marchandise à perte fouettait en elles l\'âpreté de la femme, dont la jouissance d\'acheteuse est doublée, quand elle croit voler le marchand.
FRENCH    -- Non, merci, j\'en viens.
FRENCH    Ces dames venaient de se dégager.
FRENCH    Pendant un instant, la besogne marcha.
FRENCH   L\'idée d\'un mariage l\'irritait maintenant, elle était décidée à dire non encore, non toujours, dans le cas où il pousserait la folie jusque-là.
FRENCH    -- Comptez sur moi, j\'en suis...
ENGLISH   In the shop, which was as yet void of customers, and whose employees were only just beginning to arrive, there was a low buzz as in a bee hive just awakening.
ENGLISH   The first four conveyances which had stirred up the whole neighbourhood formerly when the house occupied only the corner of the Place Gaillon, had gradually increased to sixty-two: small hand-trucks, one-horse vans, and heavy two-horse ones.
FRENCH   Les commis, noyés jusqu\'aux épaules, commençaient à replacer chaque article.
FRENCH    Cependant, Mouret la regardait toujours de son air ravi.
ENGLISH   Fortunately, inspector Jouve came to their assistance.
FRENCH   Les Baudu, vivant sans air au fond de leur étroite salle à manger, souffrirent du coup de vent que les Lhomme y apportaient, avec leur famille débandée et leur goût de libre existence.
FRENCH    Comme Mme Aurélie, qui était de la première table, descendait du réfectoire, elle rapporta le chiffre d\'affaires réalisées dans l\'année, un chiffre que les additions des divers rayons donnaient à l\'instant.
FRENCH   Pourquoi parlait-elle ainsi à ce garçon et qu\'avait-elle à se passionner? Elle resta muette, le simple mot qu\'il venait de répondre lui retentissait dans le coeur, avec un lointain bruit de cloche, dont elle était assourdie.
ENGLISH   A shopman\'s footstep, a few whispered words, the rustling of a passing skirt, were the only faint sounds; and these the warm air of the heating apparatus almost stifled.
FRENCH   Nous allons lui dire deux mots.
FRENCH   Quand des calicots se mettent à vendre des savons et des galoches, ils peuvent bien avoir l\'ambition de vendre des pommes de terre frites.
FRENCH   Justement, la porte s\'était ouverte, et le domestique se tenait debout derrière elle.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s very fashionable and very convenient.
FRENCH    -- Nom de Dieu! dit le cocher en enveloppant ses chevaux d\'un coup de fouet, j\'ai fait ma journée.
FRENCH   Seulement, je vais vous confier les miens, persuadé que je ne saurais les placer en des mains plus sages...
ENGLISH   The pedestrians flew on to the refuges in frightened bands, the foot pavements appeared black with people in the receding perspective of the broad straight thoroughfare.
FRENCH    Geneviève, après avoir jeté sur lui un long regard, dit à son tour:  -- Il faut s\'entendre, ensuite, ça va tout seul.
ENGLISH   \"Perhaps there\'s only wrong-doing that\'s at all amusing.\"  Mouret was now himself again.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! comment faire? balbutia-t-elle, au milieu de son émotion.
ENGLISH   Thanks.\"  And Denise was about to go off with her money, when she at last met Robineau.
FRENCH   Toutes les salles se ressemblaient, étaient d\'anciennes caves, de quatre mètres sur cinq, qu\'on avait enduites au ciment et aménagées en réfectoires; mais l\'humidité crevait la peinture, les murailles jaunes se marbraient de taches verdâtres; et, du puits étroit des soupiraux, ouvrant sur la rue, au ras du trottoir, tombait un jour livide, sans cesse traversé par les ombres vagues des passants.
FRENCH    -- Lui, m\'épouser! oh! non, oh! je vous jure que je n\'ai jamais voulu une pareille chose!...
FRENCH   Le pauvre enfant est assez triste de rester enfermé à Paris, lorsque nous nous promènerons là-bas.
FRENCH    -- Et ceci? lui demanda Mme de Boves en examinant un coupon de guipure.
FRENCH   Chaque fois qu\'une cliente se présentait, il y avait un mouvement parmi les garçons de magasin, rangés sous la haute porte, habillés d\'une livrée, l\'habit et le pantalon vert clair, le gilet rayé jaune et rouge.
FRENCH   Et occupez-vous de madame tout de suite.
ENGLISH   The tent of the silk-hall was this heaven\'s giant alcove, with white curtains, white gauzes and white tulles, whose shimmer screened the bride in her white nudity from the gaze of the curious.
FRENCH   Maintenant, le Bonheur dépensait chaque année près de six cent mille francs en affiches, en annonces, en appels de toutes sortes; le nombre des catalogues envoyés allait à quatre cent mille, on déchiquetait plus de cent mille francs d\'étoffes pour les échantillons.
ENGLISH   And tell them I\'ll win my lawsuit, if I have to sell my last shirt for it!\"  Denise was not to leave Robineau\'s till the end of the month.
FRENCH    Ceux-ci, en effet, continuaient leur inspection en traversant le hall.
ENGLISH   It was not much, but he had Gaujean behind him to back him up with any amount of credit.
ENGLISH   Just fancy, he talked of creating underneath my place a saloon where his people might judge the colours of the stuffs by gas-light, a subterranean room which would have joined the hosiery to the drapery departments! And he can\'t get over it; he can\'t swallow the fact that an old wreck like me should stop his progress, when all the others are on their knees before his money.
FRENCH    Un soir, après le dîner, comme ces demoiselles rangeaient les armoires, Joseph vint avertir Denise qu\'un jeune homme la demandait, en bas.
FRENCH    -- Écoutez donc, on a marché.
FRENCH   En décuplant la vente, en démocratisant le luxe, ils devenaient un terrible agent de dépense, ravageaient les ménages, travaillaient au coup de folie de la mode, toujours plus chère.
ENGLISH   It was with difficulty that you traversed the galleries on the ground floor, obstructed by straggling chairs.
FRENCH   Quand il eut remercié Mme Desforges d\'avoir parlé pour lui au ministère, il jeta vers Mouret le regard craintif d\'un homme qui rencontre le mal dont il mourra.
FRENCH   Dès lors, les observations tombèrent dru comme grêle, la galerie de la rue de la Michodière reçut l\'orage: à la draperie, un vendeur au pair, de ceux qui débutaient et qui couchaient dans leurs rayons, était rentré après onze heures; à la mercerie, le second venait de se laisser prendre au fond du sous-sol, achevant une cigarette.
FRENCH   Au contraire, Pauline étalait une robe de soie printanière, à raies violettes et blanches, une toque appareillée, chargée de plumes, des bijoux au cou et aux mains, toute une richesse de commerçante cossue.
ENGLISH   She felt the insult intended her.
ENGLISH   This made her blush for her precipitation, and she took the bag on her knees again, explaining, however, that men never understood matters and that they need not know everything.
FRENCH   Eh quoi! c\'était ce garçon qu\'elle aimait, ce misérable vendeur, la risée de son comptoir! c\'était le plus humble et le plus gauche de tous qu\'elle lui préférait, à lui le maître! car il les avait bien vus, elle abandonnant sa main, lui couvrant cette main de baisers.
FRENCH    Et, comme Geneviève regardait le léger paquet qu\'elle avait posé par terre, elle ajouta:  -- J\'ai laissé notre malle là-bas.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! descendons, reprit Mouret.
ENGLISH   It was precisely this system which, increasing his manufacturing expenses, had prevented him from competing with Dumonteil for the supply of the Paris Delight.
FRENCH   Toute sa souffrance jalouse se soulagea dans ces mots, d\'une sécheresse méprisante:  -- Qu\'elle attende!  -- Faut-il la faire entrer dans le cabinet de madame?  -- Non, non, qu\'elle reste dans l\'antichambre! Et, quand le domestique fut sorti, elle reprit tranquillement sa conversation avec Vallagnosc.
ENGLISH   Madame Guibal, Henriette, and Blanche were measuring, cutting out, and making up.
ENGLISH   Her former puny insignificance was developing into a penetrating, gentle charm.
ENGLISH   I am thoroughly exhausted but, no matter, you can\'t think how I love life! Oh! I shall win her at last, that little girl who still says no!\"  But Vallagnosc once more trotted out his pessimism.
ENGLISH   As they crossed the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs, Robineau, looking very pale and much older, ran up to join the procession.
ENGLISH   She did not avert her gaze, but she had merely turned paler.
ENGLISH    Paul, without taking his eyes off the count, replied that they were still waiting for the death of the aunt.
ENGLISH   She would certainly commit some fault at last; he would surprise her with one of her sweethearts, and she would again be dismissed.
ENGLISH   He had always thus given in to Mouret, recognising him to be the master, notwithstanding his escapades and idiotic love affairs.
FRENCH    -- Ça, répondit-elle, c\'est un entre-deux...
ENGLISH    \"What is it, Monsieur Jouve?\" asked she, feeling reassured.
FRENCH    -- À gauche, mesdames, dit Hutin, de sa voix prévenante, malgré son exaspération qui grandissait.
FRENCH    Comme elle s\'éloignait, elle reconnut près d\'elle Mme Marty, accompagnée de sa fille Valentine, une grande demoiselle de quatorze ans, maigre et hardie, qui jetait déjà sur les marchandises des regards coupables de femme.
ENGLISH   Lhomme went his own way, enraptured to resume his bachelor existence, and Albert, greatly relieved, hastened off to his beauties; so that, unaccustomed to home-life, feeling they were in each other\'s way, bored to death whenever they were together on a Sunday, they paid nothing more than flying visits to the house, as to some common hotel where people take a bed for the night.
ENGLISH   I ought not to have come, I was in bed, but got up to take a little fresh air.\"  \"It\'s just like me,\" said the other.
ENGLISH   One corner was devoted to the display of trimmings and orange-flower wreaths.
FRENCH   Puis, l\'existence les avait emportés, et ils se retrouvaient au bout de dix ans, changés et vieillis.
FRENCH   Une table fut prise d\'assaut, le tapage devint formidable.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s the manufacturers who are vexed,\" now said Bouthemont.
ENGLISH    \"It certainly isn\'t very amusing,\" resumed Clara.
ENGLISH   At home he was always angry and full of bile, always violent, with fists ever clenched.
FRENCH    Ce fut une stupeur.
FRENCH   Nous avons une petite rivière, et l\'eau est très froide, sous les broussailles, dans un endroit que je sais bien.
ENGLISH   So it was arranged that all the purchases should be centralized at one pay-desk, and thence sent down to the delivery department.
FRENCH   Le petit commerce du quartier voulait donner aux Baudu un témoignage de sympathie; et il y avait aussi, dans cet empressement, comme une manifestation contre le Bonheur des Dames, que l\'on accusait de la lente agonie de Geneviève.
FRENCH    -- Non, mademoiselle Prunaire, je n\'en sais rien, dit-elle du bout des lèvres.
ENGLISH   Her hopes were reviving, when another question troubled her.
FRENCH   Oui, je m\'étais promis de comprendre la situation, d\'être bien sage...
ENGLISH   We alone decide about the prices.\"  He went on speaking in a sharp voice, and with wounding intentions, which surprised the salesmen, for as a rule these discussions were carried on quietly, and the affair might really have been the result of a misunderstanding.
FRENCH   Moi, quand je suis là-dedans, j\'achèterais le magasin.
FRENCH    Mouret eut un geste vague, sans répondre.
FRENCH   Voyons, voulez-vous que dimanche Baugé nous conduise quelque part à la campagne? Il amènera un de ses amis.
FRENCH    You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org  1.E.2.
ENGLISH   After the soup, as soon as the servant had served the boiled beef, the old man as usual began talking about the people opposite.
ENGLISH    \"Yes,\" she at last confessed, feebly.
ENGLISH   Liénard, celebrated for his idleness, was simply indebted to his father\'s position in the drapery trade for not being turned away one afternoon when Bourdoncle found him dozing between two piles of English velvets.
FRENCH   Il perdait délicieusement haleine, c\'était là contre ses membres comme un long embrassement de toute sa clientèle.
ENGLISH   She had been kept folding all the morning, only allowed to serve a few doubtful customers, to whom moreover she had not sold anything.
FRENCH   Les comptoirs disparaissaient sous le blanc des soies et des rubans, des gants et de fichus.
ENGLISH   They make sticks, but as for handles, it\'s all up! Bring me a proper handle, and I\'ll give you twenty francs!\"  He had a real artist\'s pride; not a workman in Paris was capable of turning out a handle like his, as light and as strong.
FRENCH   Si quelqu\'un venait, vous diriez de repasser.
ENGLISH   And thereupon Madame Marty bought the costume for her daughter remarking: \"A good idea! You are very practical, my dear madame.\"  They had been obliged to abandon the chair.
ENGLISH   However, he dared not refuse, and was looking for a ten-franc piece in his purse, when Madame Aurélie, astonished at not hearing the voice of Marguerite who had been obliged to pause, perceived Mignot, and understood everything.
ENGLISH   Every article of ladies\' underwear was here displayed in a suite of rooms classified into various departments.
FRENCH   Il s\'avouait vaincu, elle était intelligente comme elle était belle, son intelligence venait du meilleur de son être.
FRENCH    Et elle retournait sur la porte, lorsque Denise l\'arrêta.
FRENCH   C\'était la continuelle tactique, des rapports sournois adressés à la direction, des occasions exploitées pour faire prendre le chef du comptoir en défaut.
ENGLISH    \"It was an accident,\" continued Denise, determined to conceal the attempt at suicide.
FRENCH   Les deux vendeurs s\'étaient aperçus de son manège.
FRENCH   Né à Montpellier, noceur, braillard, il était médiocre pour la vente; mais, pour l\'achat, on ne connaissait pas son pareil.
FRENCH   Il se fâcha quand Denise parla de régler, puis finit par accepter les quinze francs soixante, qu\'elle avait posés sur la commode; mais il voulut alors lui offrir une tasse de thé, et il se battit contre une bouilloire à esprit-de-vin, fut obligé de redescendre acheter du sucre.
FRENCH    C\'était Mouret, en train de donner son coup d\'oeil aux divers services.
FRENCH    Denise, pour le contenter, interrogea les jeunes gens.
ENGLISH   Madame Aurélie was the first to arrive; they had to wait for the cashier, who came late, scared by a whole afternoon\'s music: as for young Albert, he had accepted the invitation, but did not put in an appearance.
FRENCH    -- La boutique est seule, dit-elle enfin, en quittant la table, désireuse de faire cesser la scène.
ENGLISH    \"You know that the gentlemen have complained,\" said the delicate little girl from the under-linen department, \"and the management has promised----\"  But the others interrupted her with a burst of laughter, and began to rail at the management.
FRENCH   Moi, je ne vois pas...
ENGLISH   Like the other managers, Bouthemont drew, besides his three thousand francs regular pay, a commission on the sales.
FRENCH   Enfin, lorsque sonnaient cinq heures, il devait signer le courrier, le travail machinal de sa main recommençait, pendant qu\'elle se dressait plus dominatrice, le reprenant tout entier, pour le posséder à elle seule, durant les heures solitaires et ardentes de la nuit.
ENGLISH   The crowd had surrounded the injured man, and a policeman happened to be on the spot.
ENGLISH   Whilst in his eyes the other saleswomen only possessed a superficial education, the varnish which scales off from girls of that class, she, without any false elegance, retained her native grace, the savour of her origin.
ENGLISH    \"You understand, baron, the whole system lies in that.
FRENCH    Et, comme elle aussi pleurait, il eut un remords.
ENGLISH   But when the funeral was about to start, the latter--who had ceased weeping, her eyes scorched by her hot tears--begged her to follow the body and look after her uncle, whose mute affliction and almost idiotic grief filled the family with anxiety.
ENGLISH   Geneviève had returned to the shop in her usual silent and retiring manner.
ENGLISH   However, their voices fell, for an inspector was observed coming along, and it was useless to let the management interfere in the quarrel.
ENGLISH   You had to skirt all these rooms, and turn to the right after passing the dressmakers, before coming to the solitary end of the corridor.
ENGLISH   The young woman\'s room, a little room into which came a livid light, looked out on to the yard.
FRENCH   Montrez qui vous êtes.
ENGLISH   Yet her pretty head, with its dark hair, preserved its pleasing shapeliness.
ENGLISH    \"Ah, you will be sorry for this, on my word of honour!\" he growled between his teeth.
FRENCH   Maintenant, ils me tiennent à droite, à gauche, derrière, tenez! voyez-vous, comme je tiens dans mon poing cette pomme de canne!  C\'était vrai, on avait dû signer la cession la veille.
FRENCH   Avant tout, il faut songer au sérieux.
ENGLISH   It was so warm, so stuffy in that tiny room that Pépé had fallen asleep with his head on the table, and even Jean\'s eyes were closing.
ENGLISH   It was quite an abyss, into which something like forty-five bushels of potatoes, one hundred and twenty pounds of butter, and sixteen hundred pounds of meat were cast every day; and at each meal they had to broach three casks of wine, over a hundred and fifty gallons being served out at the wine counter.
FRENCH   Je ne sais pas...
FRENCH   Mais, quand elle questionna nettement le commis, celui-ci parut plus embarrassé encore: non, non, ce n\'était pas le patron qui l\'envoyait; et il finit par nommer Clara, il voulait simplement causer de Clara.
ENGLISH   I want to see them face to face.
FRENCH    À ce cri, le baron Hartmann parut ébranlé.
ENGLISH   Jean drew away his uncle, who was looking into the grave all agape.
ENGLISH    \"You know the \'unkempt one\' has got a child?\" said Clara one morning, on arriving in the department.
FRENCH   Ce garçon, nommé Joseph, appartenait, lui aussi, à la dynastie des Lhomme, car il était le frère de lait d\'Albert, et il devait sa place à l\'influence de Mme Aurélie.
FRENCH   J\'en ai mal à la tête.
ENGLISH    \"And the effect it produces is better than its real quality,\" said Bouthemont.
FRENCH   C\'était un gros garçon de vingt-cinq ans, lourd et madré.
ENGLISH   What the devil was Bouthemont thinking about? He went off declaring that he could not allow a buyer to display such lack of sense as to buy beyond the requirements of the business.
ENGLISH   As a rule, she bought direct, and on her own responsibility; but, for important purchases, she preferred to consult the chiefs of the house.
ENGLISH   And, behind his handsome face, with its well-trimmed beard, and eyes the colour of old gold, she beheld the dead woman, that Madame Hédouin, whose blood had helped to cement the stones of the house.
FRENCH    -- Comment! vous l\'aimez? Mais, c\'est bien simple: dites oui.
ENGLISH   Amidst light bursts of laughter voices were repeating \"Monsieur Mouret! Monsieur Mouret!\"  And as the latter, annoyed at being interrupted, pretended not to hear, Madame de Boves, who had risen a moment previously, came as far as the door of the little drawing-room.
FRENCH   Toute cette dynastie des Lhomme, dont elle était le chef incontesté, lui donnait parfois bien du mal.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! il faut bien goûter à tout, finit par confesser Mouret, en affectant de s\'égayer également.
ENGLISH    \"You will come this evening?\" asked he.
FRENCH   Cependant, ils allaient avec douceur, sans crainte.
ENGLISH    \"Come,\" resumed Gaujean, to cut short the argument, \"all that is simply theory.
FRENCH   Ça nous repose un peu, d\'être assises.
FRENCH   On avait ouvert le châssis vitré du soupirail, afin de changer l\'air étouffant et empesté; mais il fallut le refermer tout de suite, les roues des fiacres semblaient passer sur la table.
FRENCH   Mais il dut obéir.
FRENCH   Déjà, voulant éviter la fatigue des étages aux dames délicates, il avait fait installer deux ascenseurs, capitonnés de velours.
FRENCH   Alors, Robineau qui la regardait avec intérêt, apitoyé sans doute par sa mine pauvre, se permit un renseignement.
FRENCH    -- Vous devriez la faire, dit Favier de son air de pince sans- rire.
FRENCH   Pépé, en extase devant le chien, se soulevait, appuyait ses deux petits bras sur les genoux du vieux.
ENGLISH   As a rule he never interfered with the staff; but this time he affected to see an encroachment on his attributions, an attempt to over-ride his authority.
FRENCH    Dès la porte, c\'était ainsi un émerveillement, une surprise qui, toutes, les ravissait.
FRENCH   Mais, devant le succès de la valenciennes, elle ne put résister à l\'envie d\'en tirer encore un mouchoir.
ENGLISH   Though they thought Bourras so stupid, they also, despite themselves, ever and ever returned to the contemplation of that spectacle which rent their hearts.
ENGLISH   So I have to stand a dinner for five persons, two fellows and three girls.
ENGLISH   Round the table, the clerks continued opening and reading the letters, the paper rustling all the time, whilst before the pigeon-holes the various articles ordered began to arrive.
ENGLISH   Then she had gone down to the boot department, at the further end of a gallery on the ground-floor, behind the cravats, a counter which had been opened that day, and which she had turned topsy turvy, seized with sickly desire in presence of the white silk slippers trimmed with swansdown and the white satin boots and shoes with high Louis XV.
ENGLISH    \"Very good, mademoiselle,\" said she majestically, as though to preserve her authority; \"we will write to you.\"  Denise stood there, unable to move for a moment, hardly knowing how to take her leave in the midst of all these people.
ENGLISH    When Bourdoncle, on the day in question, entered Mouret\'s private room at about three o\'clock, according to custom, he found him sitting with his elbows on his desk, his hands over his eyes, so greatly absorbed that he had to touch him on the shoulder.
FRENCH   Riche à présent, elle se donnait du luxe, un édredon rouge recouvert d\'un voile de guipure, un petit tapis devant l\'armoire, deux vases de verre bleu sur la toilette, où se fanaient des roses.
ENGLISH   Geneviève, wounded by Madame Aurélie\'s imperial airs, did not open her mouth; but Colomban admired her with a shiver, on reflecting that she reigned over Clara.
FRENCH   Alors, Mouret, pris d\'embarras, affecta de rire.
ENGLISH    \"Yes, those rheumatic pains which tormented you so much when you were here.\"  He then recollected the fibs he had told and slightly coloured.
ENGLISH   \"Monsieur Bouthemont wishes you to show some _foulards_ of the lightest patterns.\"  In the middle of the department, an exhibition of summer silks illumined the hall with an aurora-like brilliancy, like the rising of a planet amidst the most delicate tints: pale rose, soft yellow, limpid blue, indeed the whole scarf of Iris.
ENGLISH   As long as his principal entrance should remain in the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, in a dark street of olden Paris, his work would be incomplete, deficient in logic.
FRENCH   C\'étaient des foulards d\'une finesse de nuée, des surahs plus légers que les duvets envolés des arbres, des pékins satinés à la peau souple de vierge chinoise.
ENGLISH   And it was in vain that she tried to dishearten him, by reproaching him with the pain he was causing Geneviève for such a heartless girl.
FRENCH   Ce n\'était guère salutaire des journées pareilles.
ENGLISH   Of a beautiful flaxen hue, it fell to her ankles: and when she did it up, it was so troublesome that she simply rolled it in a knot, keeping it together with the strong teeth of a bone comb.
FRENCH   Il y avait bien quelques chaises pour les clientes; mais, comme on ne lui disait pas de s\'asseoir, elle n\'osa en prendre une, malgré le trouble qui lui cassait les jambes.
FRENCH    -- C\'est mon mari, balbutia Mme Marty pleine de trouble.
ENGLISH   I didn\'t know whether I loved him, I was his wife, that was all.
FRENCH    Henriette, qui suffoquait, avait tiré son mouchoir et s\'en écrasait les lèvres.
ENGLISH    \"Oh yes, very well.
ENGLISH    \"So cloth will be worn?\" resumed Madame Marty, whose rugged face sparkled with coquettish passion.
FRENCH   Tandis que, dehors, soufflait le vent glacé des giboulées, déjà la belle saison, dans les galeries du Bonheur, s\'attiédissait avec les étoffes légères, l\'éclat fleuri des nuances tendres, la gaieté champêtre des modes d\'été et des ombrelles.
ENGLISH   \"But never fear, every one doesn\'t detest them.\"  And so speaking she looked at Colomban, who was rolling up some bread-crumbs with an absorbed air.
ENGLISH   I am sure you will like it, madame.\"  She was now blaming herself for having gone to fetch Pépé from Madame Gras\' on the previous Sunday, to take him for a walk in the Champs-Elysées.
ENGLISH    Some liked it but others thought it too sticky.
FRENCH    À deux jours de là, Marguerite, en remontant de dîner, donna une autre nouvelle.
ENGLISH   He will answer you better than I can.\"  And he rushed off to take Madame Marty\'s purchases from the woollen salesman who had accompanied the ladies.
ENGLISH   And then the storm, kept back all day, broke out, one and all seeking to relieve their feelings by abusing the \"monster\".
ENGLISH   Then he began to smile again, forced her to come forward, and finished by saying that he would make her a present of all the money she could take in her hand; and there was a sort of love bargain beneath his playfulness.
ENGLISH   It was a room with a glazed partition in which was a metal-work wicket, and it contained an enormous safe, fixed in the wall.
FRENCH   À quoi bon cette conquête du monde, puisque c\'était non, toujours non?  Maintenant, le soir, lorsqu\'il arrivait devant la caisse de Lhomme, il regardait encore par habitude le chiffre de la recette, inscrit sur une carte, que le caissier embrochait dans une pique de fer, à côté de lui; rarement le chiffre tombait au-dessous de cent mille francs, il montait parfois à huit ou neuf cent mille, les jours de grande exposition; et ce chiffre ne sonnait plus à son oreille comme un coup de trompette, il regrettait de l\'avoir regardé, il en emportait une amertume, la haine et le mépris de l\'argent.
ENGLISH   \"What! doesn\'t hurt us! An insupportable being who is always irritable and so proud that he would walk over one rather than not pass.\"  This was the great grievance of the department.
ENGLISH   That\'s nobody\'s business.
ENGLISH    \"You see, they are quite at home,\" said Mouret, who pointed with a broad gesture to the multitude of women with which the departments were overflowing.
ENGLISH   As the messenger continually glanced in that direction, the saleswomen began to laugh; whereupon he became very confused, and plunged into his accounts, whilst Marguerite, in order to arrest the burst of gaiety which was tickling her throat, cried out louder still: \"Fourteen jackets, English cloth, second size, at fifteen francs!\"  At this, Madame Aurélie, who was calling out some cloaks, could not make herself heard.
FRENCH   La foule s\'y écrasait.
ENGLISH    \"But I\'m dying of hunger!\" continued Hutin, aloud.
ENGLISH   This was in the atmosphere of the house, in the struggle for existence whose continued massacres helped on the sales around him.
ENGLISH   This time, however, she felt her to be a kind of protection.
FRENCH    Lorsqu\'il passa, Mouret s\'arrêta un instant devant la glissoire.
ENGLISH   As soon as trouble fell on himself, as soon as he was just touched by human suffering, at which he had always coldly laughed, the boastful sceptic collapsed and bled.
FRENCH    -- Oui, vos amants!...
ENGLISH   What\'s certain is, that she must have been weeping.
FRENCH   Je descendais.
FRENCH   Et elle eut enfin, en menant Pépé embrasser les Baudu, l\'âme déchirée par la douleur morne du Vieil Elbeuf.
ENGLISH   Were they going to keep him there long? Really the women took things very coolly, it was like stealing money out of his pocket.
FRENCH   Seuls au fond du petit salon, un boudoir très coquet tendu de soie bouton d\'or, loin des oreilles et ne voyant plus eux-mêmes ces dames que par la porte grande ouverte, ils ricanèrent, les yeux dans les yeux, en s\'allongeant des tapes sur les genoux.
ENGLISH   Hasn\'t your son-in-law made an appointment with you inside?\"  Madame de Boves did not reply, being absorbed in contemplation of the string of carriages, whose doors one by one opened and gave egress to more customers.
ENGLISH   Let\'s go and take a turn downstairs.
ENGLISH   The circumstance that he had lost an arm did not at all incommode him in this work, and indeed people would go to his office out of curiosity to see him verify the receipts, so rapidly did the notes and coins slip through his left hand, the only one remaining to him.
ENGLISH   I have come to an understanding with several of my brother manufacturers at Lyons, and have brought you an exceptional offer--a black silk, a faille which you can sell at five francs fifty centimes a mêtre.
FRENCH   Boutarel, quand il avait compris, s\'était fâché carrément, criant qu\'il voulait sa femme, qu\'il entendait savoir ce qu\'on lui faisait, qu\'il ne la laisserait certainement pas se déshabiller sans lui.
FRENCH   Mais elle était trop désireuse d\'être agréable au patron pour hésiter.
ENGLISH     For a moment Denise stood bewildered on the pavement, in the sun which still shone fiercely at five o\'clock.
FRENCH   Puis, l\'air triomphant:  -- Hein? tu as vu? il s\'est baissé, il lui a glissé une adresse.
FRENCH   Mouret n\'apercevait que ses lourds cheveux blonds, tordus sur la nuque délicate; mais, au frisson qui les soulevait, il croyait voir le malaise et la honte du visage.
FRENCH   Toutes les chances, ce Mouret! Paris saluait son étoile, accourait le voir debout, puisque les flammes maintenant se chargeaient de balayer à ses pieds la concurrence; et l\'on chiffrait déjà les gains de la saison, on estimait le flot élargi de cohue qu\'allait faire couler, sous sa porte, la fermeture forcée de la maison rivale.
FRENCH   Cette fille est une sotte qui n\'a pas une idée...
FRENCH    Des pleurs gonflèrent ses paupières.
FRENCH    Alors, elle sortit, et sa robe de soie noire, contre la porte, eut un frôlement de couleuvre, filant dans les broussailles.
FRENCH   Une belle journée, vraiment! Si ça continuait, il ne gagnerait pas de quoi payer de l\'eau de seltz à ses invités.
FRENCH    -- Je ne sais pas...
ENGLISH   On reaching the passage he became brutal, and it was with loathing and revolt that she banged the door in his face.
FRENCH   Vous êtes le maître, vous avez plus de sagesse que nous tous.
ENGLISH    \"Oh, look!\" said she, her head still at the window, \"there\'s Monsieur Lhomme.
FRENCH    Mais elle l\'interrompit, en apercevant Pépé.
FRENCH    Muette, le visage encore frais du grand air, Mme Marty se haussait pour voir avant les autres, par-dessus les têtes, s\'élargir les profondeurs des magasins.
FRENCH   Là, il inclina la tête, il lui sourit, du sourire qu\'il avait pour toutes les femmes.
FRENCH   Elle devinait sans doute que Mouret s\'était simplement servi d\'elle pour se rapprocher du baron.
FRENCH   Devant la porte, deux commis, montés sur une échelle double, finissaient de pendre des lainages, tandis que, dans une vitrine de la rue Neuve-Saint- Augustin, un autre commis, agenouillé et le dos tourné, plissait délicatement une pièce de soie bleue.
FRENCH   Seulement, celle-ci, mise en éveil, s\'était très bien aperçue du regard dont il avait d\'abord enveloppé Denise.
ENGLISH   Of this enormous square there still remained a large plot of ground fronting the last named street, which he had not acquired; and this sufficed to spoil his triumph, he was tormented by a desire to complete his conquest, to erect there a sort of apotheosis, a monumental façade.
ENGLISH   However, he restrained himself, and with the air of a good-natured master simply interesting himself in one of his young ladies resumed: \"Come now, if I begged of you--You know what great esteem I have for you.\"  Denise retained her respectful attitude.
ENGLISH   And when she was inside her room, with the door closed, she fell down on the bed; her feet pained her so much.
ENGLISH   Pauline, on one occasion when she was alone, confided to her that she was perhaps going to marry her lover; it was she who was hesitating, for they did not care for married saleswomen at The Ladies\' Paradise.
ENGLISH   Ought I not to have married them at once, without yielding to my stupid pride, my obstinacy in refusing to leave them the business in a less prosperous state than it had been before? Had I done that she would now have the man she loved, and perhaps their youthful strength united would have accomplished the miracle that I have failed to work.
FRENCH    En quelques phrases brèves, il mettait au courant Mme Baudu et sa fille.
ENGLISH    \"Mademoiselle Cugnot, just look at that mane,\" said Clara, whom Marguerite was nudging, also feigning to be on the point of bursting into laughter.
FRENCH   D\'abord, on boucha les crevasses et on badigeonna la façade; ensuite, on repeignit les boiseries de la devanture en vert clair; même on poussa la splendeur jusqu\'à dorer l\'enseigne.
ENGLISH   For a moment he attempted to talk of her uncle Baudu; but had to give it up on seeing how uncomfortable this made the girl.
ENGLISH   As Bourdoncle had come out, he preferred to relate everything to him; and they slowly passed through the shawl department, walking side by side, the one leaning over and talking in a low tone, the other listening without a muscle of his severe face betraying his impressions.
FRENCH   Elle était honnête, elle s\'indignait, lorsqu\'on parlait de ces filles qui se donnent au premier venu.
ENGLISH   She would certainly suffer there as much as formerly; she was already suffering from an unknown uneasiness since Deloche\'s stories.
FRENCH   Un seul bec de gaz brûlait, l\'ombre du plafond bas tombait à larges pelletées, comme la terre noire d\'une fosse.
FRENCH    Puis, se tournant:  -- Mesdemoiselles!  Denise s\'approchait, mais Clara s\'était précipitée.
ENGLISH    Geneviève made a gesture of despair.
FRENCH   C\'était là que celui-ci avait entendu Favier, à une table voisine, raconter des abominations sur Denise, la façon dont elle avait «fait» le patron, en se retroussant, quand elle montait un escalier devant lui.
FRENCH   Henriette, dans les crises de sa jalousie, s\'abandonnait à une intimité dont il restait surpris et embarrassé, car elle perdait ses prudences de femme du monde, mettant son art à sauver les apparences.
FRENCH   Mais ces vingt-six sous par jour entretenaient Jean, elle ne se plaignait pas du manque de sommeil, elle se serait estimée très heureuse, si une catastrophe n\'avait une fois encore bouleversé son budget.
ENGLISH   But be careful, I\'m not one to be swallowed up, you know!\"  Discountenanced by the sharp attack of this wonderful fellow, who guessed everything, Bourdoncle stammered: \"What now? Are you joking? I who have always admired you so much!\"  \"Don\'t tell lies!\" replied Mouret, more violently than ever.
ENGLISH   Then they returned to the door, where an outward current was already established, an interminable _défilé_ of women and children, above whom hovered a multitude of red air-balls.
FRENCH   Oh! une tristesse, et des yeux rouges!  Un silence régna.
ENGLISH    \"Father,\" said Geneviève, uncomfortable for Denise\'s sake, \"shall I close the window? there\'s rather a bad smell.\"  He himself smelt nothing, and seemed surprised.
ENGLISH   But the appearance of the marchioness, as Clara ill-naturedly called the poor creature, had disturbed the department.
FRENCH   C\'était du reste une élégance, il fallait se nourrir sur son argent.
FRENCH   Elle, également, jouait la surprise.
FRENCH    Mouret, cependant, avait jeté un coup d\'oeil vers le salon.
ENGLISH    \"Well, what?\" said she.
FRENCH   Favier prit pourtant de la raie.
ENGLISH   This had filled him with rancour, and he saw in Robineau the instrument of a decisive battle with those drapery bazaars which he accused of ruining French manufactures.
ENGLISH   It would be very dear, and she had faithfully promised her husband to be reasonable! She had been buying for an hour, quite a pile of articles was following her already: a muff and some quilling for herself and some stockings for her daughter.
ENGLISH   Had she likewise some tender affection in her heart that she proved so brave? She still thought of Hutin, full of uneasiness.
ENGLISH   Beyond this first refectory came that of the messengers and carmen, where the meals were served irregularly, according to the needs of the moment.
FRENCH    Alors, Denise céda, devant cette amitié qui s\'offrait si franchement.
ENGLISH    \"Who\'ll take my rice for a dessert?\" all at once asked Hutin; and when he had concluded his bargain with a short, thin young fellow, he attempted to sell his wine also; but no one would take it as it was known to be detestable.
ENGLISH   There were any number of bills announcing, \"Apartments to Let.\" But repeatedly overcome by the emotion which was agitating her whole being she saw them confusedly.
ENGLISH   Even Pépé, clinging tightly to his sister\'s hand, opened his big eyes in wonder.
ENGLISH   The dining-room of the managers and second-hands happened to be just opposite.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! disait le vieillard, ce n\'est pas riche, mais la fenêtre est gaie, on voit le monde dans la rue.
ENGLISH   \"And as I heard you are wanting a good saleswoman----\" he added.
FRENCH   Au-dehors seulement, reprenait la vie individuelle, avec la brusque flambée des passions qui se réveillaient.
ENGLISH   On each stair was a strongly fixed dummy, displaying some garment or other: a costume, cloak, or dressing-gown; and the whole was like a double row of soldiers at attention whilst some triumphal procession went past.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s very simple; the young lady will take your measure, and we will make you another.\"  \"No, I want this one, I want it immediately,\" she resumed with vivacity.
ENGLISH   The mother was hemming some dusters.
ENGLISH   For the last fortnight she had been worn out with fatigue and anxiety; she had been obliged to put Pépé to school, and had been running about on account of Jean, who was so stricken with the pastrycook\'s niece, that he had implored his sister to go and ask her hand in marriage.
FRENCH    Cependant, M.
ENGLISH   To have built up this giant machine, to reign over such a world of people, and yet to be dying of grief because a little girl would not accept him! He scorned himself, dragging the fever and shame of his pain about with him everywhere.
ENGLISH   She now earned more than twelve thousand francs a year in the mantle department, whilst he only drew a fixed salary of five thousand francs.
ENGLISH   He grumbled, declared that Baudu must be fearfully strong to be able to keep up after such hard blows as he had received.
FRENCH   Mais seize cent mille francs de gain était encore une jolie somme, on pouvait se contenter du quatre pour cent, lorsqu\'on opérait sur des capitaux pareils.
FRENCH    Du coup, Mouret éclata.
FRENCH   Justement, Mignot descendait, avec les vingt francs qu\'il venait d\'emprunter; et il s\'était arrêté, il coulait dix francs dans la main d\'Albert, en lui donnant rendez-vous pour le soir, une noce projetée, entravée par le manque d\'argent, possible enfin, malgré la médiocrité de la somme.
FRENCH   Il bégaya:  -- Ça devait être dans le sang, le père est mort l\'été dernier d\'avoir trop couru la gueuse.
FRENCH   Non, vois-tu, ils ne peuvent pas être heureux.
ENGLISH   Besides, the others might abuse the food as much as they liked, they swallowed it all the same.
ENGLISH   Several mantles tumbled down, and all the heaps on the tables, carried with them, toppled over one after the other, so that the carpet was quite strewn with them.
FRENCH   Dans la vibration vivante de la maison entière, les limons de fer avaient sous les pieds un branle sensible, comme tremblant aux haleines de la foule.
FRENCH   Ses grosses moustaches grises, ses cheveux taillés en brosse, lui donnaient une grande honnêteté militaire.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, elle entra au rayon, où les autres vendeuses arrivaient.
FRENCH   Ça ne nous regarde pas...
FRENCH   Au martyre physique s\'ajoutait la sourde persécution de ses camarades.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! cher monsieur, demanda-t-il pour conclure, voulez-vous être avec moi? L\'affaire des terrains vous semble-t-elle possible?  Le baron, à demi conquis, hésitait pourtant à s\'engager de la sorte.
ENGLISH   For some minutes however, whilst still talking, he had been watching Hutin, who was slowly arranging his silks--placing blue, grey, and yellow side by side and then stepping back to judge of the harmony of the tints.
FRENCH    Lui aussi regardait Deloche.
FRENCH   Une bibliothèque fut créée, dix mille volumes mis à la disposition des employés.
FRENCH   Les pupilles de ses yeux gris étaient minces comme celles d\'une chatte arrivant du plein jour; et elle avait la chair reposée, le regard clair d\'une personne qui s\'éveille.
FRENCH   Mais ce qui la surprenait surtout, dans la fatigue de ses yeux aveuglés par le pêle-mêle éclatant des couleurs, c\'était, lorsqu\'elle fermait les paupières, de sentir davantage la foule, à son bruit sourd de marée montante et à la chaleur humaine qu\'elle exhalait.
ENGLISH   The vaulting of the ceilings, like the partitions, was of brick.
ENGLISH    Jean, however, was getting bored and stopped a passer-by.
ENGLISH    \"Good heavens! I love you! I love you! Why do you delight in tormenting me like this? You can see that nothing else exists for me, that the people I speak about only touch me through you, that you alone can occupy my thoughts.
ENGLISH    And it was Denise who suffered for all this.
ENGLISH   At last, right at the other end of the basement, he arrived at the delivery office.
FRENCH    Puis, elle revint vers l\'autre.
FRENCH   Retenue par son petit monde, Mme Bourdelais ne pouvait s\'arracher des articles de Paris.
ENGLISH   Why hadn\'t she explained the matter, and brought her brother forward? They would now imagine all sorts of villanies, and, say what she might, they would never believe her.
FRENCH   Mais elle était si drôle de dessin!  À ce moment, comme elle levait les yeux, elle aperçut en face d\'elle son mari terrifié.
ENGLISH    But a moment afterwards Denise was forgotten.
ENGLISH   The horizon crumbled into powder, became no more than a contemptible frame-work extending past the heights of Châtillon, out into the open country, whose blurred expanses indicated how far extended the state of slavery.
ENGLISH   But suddenly the servant entered with two lamps, and the charm was destroyed.
FRENCH   Puis, venaient des tissus plus forts, les satins merveilleux, les soies duchesse, teintes chaudes, roulant à flots grossis.
ENGLISH   He took her hands in his and stammered: \"Go away quickly, my child, and forget this house!\"  Henriette, perfectly amazed, choking with anger, stood looking at them.
ENGLISH    Pépé then jumped upon his sister\'s lap, whilst Jean leant against the panelling beside her.
FRENCH   Et c\'était cette sérénité dans la patience qui exaspérait davantage Mme Desforges.
ENGLISH   With the silk-vendors the stock-taking was going on rapidly.
FRENCH   C\'était Denise.
FRENCH   Et les joues blanches de la jeune fille étaient peu à peu envahies par un flot de sang.
FRENCH   Puis, Jean retourné chez son patron, Pépé endormi, elle passait une nuit affreuse, dans l\'angoisse du lendemain.
FRENCH   Oui, j\'aurais été heureux de vous dire plus tôt combien j\'ai regretté l\'erreur qui a été commise.
FRENCH   Restez avec elle.
ENGLISH   Beneath the crushing blow, her uncle, unable to stop himself, still kept walking round and round the table, with his funeral-like step, seeing nothing and silent; whilst her aunt who said nothing either, remained huddled together on a chair, with the white face of one who is wounded and whose blood is running away drop by drop.
FRENCH   Puis, il était surtout exaspéré de n\'avoir pas eu une idée géniale de Bouthemont: ce bon vivant ne venait-il pas de faire bénir ses magasins par le curé de la Madeleine, suivi de tout son clergé! une cérémonie étonnante, une pompe religieuse promenée de la soierie à la ganterie, Dieu tombé dans les pantalons de femme et dans les corsets; ce qui n\'avait pas empêché le tout de brûler, mais ce qui valait un million d\'annonces, tellement le coup était porté sur la clientèle mondaine.
ENGLISH   \"Pray don\'t put on that funeral face.
ENGLISH   Then, retracing his steps, he suddenly exclaimed: \"You know they\'ll have their revenge.\"  \"Who will?\" asked Mouret, who had lost the thread of the conversation.
FRENCH    Le drapier conta sa démarche inutile, puis ajouta qu\'on avait indiqué une place à leur nièce; et, le bras tendu vers le Bonheur des Dames, dans un geste de mépris, il lâcha ces mots:  -- Tiens! là-dedans!  Toute la famille en demeura blessée.
ENGLISH   She pushed them about, and made some more room.
ENGLISH   Denise on her side only carried the few yards of silk, bought by Madame Desforges.
ENGLISH   The Ladies\' Paradise now spent nearly six hundred thousand francs a year in posters, advertisements, and appeals of all sorts; four hundred thousand catalogues were sent away, more than a hundred thousand francs\' worth of material was cut up for patterns.
FRENCH   La plupart filaient seuls et s\'engouffraient au fond du magasin, sans adresser ni une parole ni même un regard à leurs collègues, qui allongeaient le pas autour d\'eux; d\'autres allaient par deux ou par trois, parlant vite, tenant la largeur du trottoir; et tous, du même geste, avant d\'entrer, jetaient dans le ruisseau leur cigarette ou leur cigare.
FRENCH    -- Vous avez un échantillon? demanda-t-il.
ENGLISH   \"Listen, you\'re a fine fellow, and I like you.
FRENCH   Avec vous, ça m\'est égal; mais pas les autres, pas les autres!...
FRENCH   Seulement, j\'ai diminué mon personnel, il n\'y a plus ici que trois personnes, et le moment n\'est guère venu d\'en engager une quatrième.
ENGLISH   You know how greatly I esteem you.\"  He went with her to the door, which he closed behind her.
FRENCH   Est-ce qu\'il n\'était plus le maître, par hasard, pour qu\'on se permît de donner des ordres? Tout devait lui passer sous les yeux.
FRENCH    Alors, Denise la questionna.
ENGLISH   And now they\'ve got me on the right, on the left, and at the back, just in the way that I\'m holding the knob of this stick in my hand!\"  It was true, the sale must have been concluded on the previous day.
FRENCH   D\'abord, il citait les voleuses de profession, celles qui faisaient le moins de mal, car la police les connaissait presque toutes.
ENGLISH    Meanwhile, the block was becoming so great in the silk department that Madame Desforges and Madame Marty could not find a salesman disengaged.
FRENCH   Elle ne se chiffonne pas...
FRENCH   Puis, le jeune homme, qui surveillait à son tour les galanteries du comte auprès de Mme Guibal, reprit tout bas:  -- Ma foi, tu as raison...
ENGLISH   However, their strolls along the pathways ended by bringing them back to the banks of the Marne, all the same, and they became interested in all the river life, the squadrons of yawls and skiffs, and the young men who formed the crews.
ENGLISH    \"Really,\" he repeated, trying to assume a naive look, \"you\'ll hand over the street ready made, with sewers, pavements, and gas lamps.
ENGLISH   It was an unexpected success, and he already thought of extending this branch of his business.
ENGLISH   And now, with her limpid eyes, and pale complexion, she was free from all agitation, entirely absorbed in her work, resolved to silence her heart and to do nothing but her will.
FRENCH    -- Mais elle n\'est pas malade, vous exagérez...
FRENCH   Oui, elle est sur la place, devant la fontaine...
FRENCH   Est-ce que Paris n\'est pas aux femmes, et les femmes ne sont-elles pas à nous?.
ENGLISH   For the last year the lady had drawn all the money she could from Boves, making constant appointments with him in public places, churches, museums, and shops.
FRENCH   Nous ne pouvons pas être plus malheureux qu\'à Valognes.
FRENCH   Une seule des jambes, la gauche, se trouvait cassée, au-dessus de la cheville.
FRENCH   Aussi est-il sans un sou maintenant, et si un miracle ne se produit pas, s\'il n\'arrive pas à tripler sa vente, comme il l\'espère, vous verrez quelle débâcle! ...
ENGLISH   She was looking for the mantle required, when she set up a cry of surprise.
FRENCH    Les yeux de Denise, involontairement, s\'étaient levés sur le portrait de Mme Hédouin, de cette dame si belle et si sage, dont le sang, disait-on, portait bonheur à la maison.
FRENCH   L\'ombre était froide, une haleine vive soufflait dans le soleil, élargissait au loin, sur l\'autre rive, la pureté limpide d\'une plaine, déroulant des cultures.
ENGLISH   Since the Joinville excursion, she had not dared to read her heart, full of confused sensations.
FRENCH   Puis, elle souriait, le coeur apaisé, n\'ayant en elle que de la bonté et de la raison, un amour de la vérité et de la logique qui était toute sa force.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, les rayons poussaient toujours, on en avait essayé deux nouveaux en décembre, afin de boucher les vides de la morte- saison d\'hiver: un rayon de livres et un rayon de jouets d\'enfants, qui devaient certainement grandir aussi et balayer encore des commerces voisins.
ENGLISH   Besides, they could not forgive her for going to Joinville, regarding it as a sign of revolt, a means of setting the whole department at defiance, by exhibiting herself out of doors with a young lady from a rival counter.
FRENCH   Des passants attroupés causaient très haut avec les démolisseurs, qui se fâchaient contre ces vieilles bâtisses, bonnes à tuer le monde.
FRENCH   Si elle est malade, elle devrait le dire.
ENGLISH    \"Leave me alone,\" she murmured drawing back.
FRENCH    On entendit un craquement terrible.
ENGLISH   Was it possible that such a child could torture him in this manner? He could always recall her arrival at The Ladies\' Paradise, with her heavy shoes, thin black dress, and wild look.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! you understand well enough,\" answered the baron.
FRENCH   Sous la grâce même de sa galanterie, Mouret laissait ainsi passer la brutalité d\'un juif vendant de la femme à la livre: il lui élevait un temple, la faisait encenser par une légion de commis, créait le rite d\'un culte nouveau; il ne pensait qu\'à elle, cherchait sans relâche à imaginer des séductions plus grandes; et, derrière elle, quand il lui avait vidé la poche et détraqué les nerfs, il était plein du secret mépris de l\'homme auquel une maîtresse vient de faire la bêtise de se donner.
FRENCH   Puis, ce ne sont pas encore les femmes, dont je me moque après tout.
FRENCH   Des garçons en tablier blanc servaient ces dames, ce qui évitait à celles-ci le désagrément de prendre elles mêmes leurs portions au guichet.
FRENCH   Il a soif.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle l\'interrompit pour déclarer qu\'il fallait la renvoyer sur l\'heure.
FRENCH   Alors, les épingles étant venues à manquer:  -- Tenez, mon ami, regardez dans la boîte d\'ivoire, sur la toilette...
FRENCH   Il insista, en ajoutant:  -- Ça ne vaudrait rien, ni pour toi, ni pour nous.
FRENCH    En bas, dans l\'échauffement de l\'après-midi, l\'inventaire ronflait davantage.
FRENCH   Seulement, il m\'asticote, il croit me faire tourner le sang, parce qu\'il a mis son rayon de draperie, là, en face.
FRENCH   Comprenait-on cela? des articles de Paris! Vrai, ces gens n\'étaient pas fiers, ils finiraient par vendre du poisson.
FRENCH   Non, par plaisir, demande leur un peu ce qu\'ils pensent de tes amis.
FRENCH    Cependant, les rires tombèrent tout d\'un coup, on entendit la besogne reprendre son ronflement régulier.
ENGLISH    \"Well, here are the things,\" resumed Jean.
FRENCH   Toutes, la tête haute, les gestes brusques, étaient chez elles, sans politesse les unes pour les autres, usant de la maison tant qu\'elles pouvaient, jusqu\'à en emporter la poussière des murs.
FRENCH    Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm collection.
ENGLISH   Nevertheless he was shaken, captivated by her young voice which still quivered at the thought of the hardships she had undergone, and was so instinct with earnestness as she pointed out reforms which would tend to consolidate the house; and even while joking with her he listened.
ENGLISH   That very morning even, each department had deputed a spokesman.
ENGLISH   She blushed slightly, explaining that Blanche had wished to see the Spanish-blonde cravats.
ENGLISH   Quite a weariness of mind, a desire mingled with lassitude resulted from these imaginings; and she seemed to have already had her fill of amusements which she had never tasted.
FRENCH   Maintenant, les chambres des demoiselles occupaient le cinquième étage des bâtiments neufs, le long de la rue Monsigny; elles étaient au nombre de soixante, aux deux côtés d\'un corridor, et plus confortables, toujours meublées pourtant du lit de fer, de la grande armoire et de la petite toilette de noyer.
FRENCH    Et il continua ses plaintes timides et caressantes.
ENGLISH   A shopman calling her made her run away.
FRENCH   La sacoche eut une claire sonnerie d\'or, deux des sacs en crevant lâchèrent des coulées d\'argent et de cuivre, tandis que, du portefeuille, sortaient des coins de billets de banque.
ENGLISH   Through the glassless windows you could see the inside of the house, the wretched rooms, and the black staircase, to which the sun had not penetrated for the last two hundred years.
FRENCH   Mme Desforges, cédant à une antipathie de nature contraire, agacée par le visage doux de la jeune fille, ajouta méchamment:  -- Sans doute, il irait mieux si la robe de mademoiselle était moins large.
ENGLISH   As for Geneviève, she was anxiously watching Colomban, who, unaware that he was being observed, remained in ecstasy, looking at the young saleswomen in the mantle department of the Paradise, whose counter was visible through the first floor window.
FRENCH   Ne pleurez pas si fort, ça dérange mes locataires.
ENGLISH   Bales of dark goods reached to the beams above; a smell of wool and dye--a sharp chemical smell--prevailed, intensified it seemed by the humidity of the floor.
FRENCH    Les Baudu n\'étaient pas de mauvaises gens.
FRENCH   Ah! s\'ils pouvaient tous se casser les reins!...
ENGLISH   But the next day Mouret marked his material at five francs four sous.
FRENCH   Il professait que la femme est sans force contre la réclame, qu\'elle finit fatalement par aller au bruit.
FRENCH   Il n\'y a peut-être que le mal qui soit un peu drôle.
ENGLISH   She wept on, wetting her sleeve with her tears.
FRENCH   Mais, en voyant les caissiers inactifs se renverser derrière leur guichet, en constatant que les tables aux paquets restaient nues, avec leurs boîtes à ficelle et leurs mains de papier bleu, Mouret, indigné d\'avoir peur, croyait sentir sa grande machine s\'immobiliser et se refroidir sous lui.
FRENCH    -- Voyez donc, est-ce adorable!  Ces dames, qui avaient fait quelques pas, se trouvaient devant le nouveau rayon des fleurs et plumes, installé dans la galerie centrale, entre la soierie et la ganterie.
FRENCH   Elle perdit un instant son calme, elle balbutia:  -- Je ne sais pas...
FRENCH    Brusquement, Mouret s\'était planté devant lui, et de sa voix terrible des jours de crise:  -- Dites donc, mon brave, vous êtes trop gai...
ENGLISH    \"Chicken,\" repeated Favier, getting impatient.
ENGLISH   It\'s too bad of you.\"  \"Well, I\'m lost,\" he repeated, with a tragical gesture.
FRENCH    -- Il y avait aussi ce mouchoir...
FRENCH   Y êtes-vous, mademoiselle Baudu?  -- Oui, madame.
FRENCH   Alors, cédant à une poussée de son coeur, Denise s\'agenouilla, entoura Geneviève de ses bras fraternels.
FRENCH   Aussi, commençaient-ils à ne plus se reconnaître sur les comptoirs envahis, où les tissus se mêlaient et s\'écroulaient.
FRENCH   Est-ce que les premiers et les seconds devraient vendre! ...
ENGLISH   But his deepest scheme was to conquer the mother through her child, when unable to do so through her own coquetry; and to attain this object there was no means that he neglected.
FRENCH   Elle se faisait de la vie une idée de logique, de sagesse et de courage.
ENGLISH   Deslignières had had a fit, Piot and Rivoire walked on in silence, with downcast looks, like men entirely played out.
FRENCH    -- Du moment qu\'il ne plaît pas à madame..., reprenait la première.
ENGLISH   The open doorway seemed to conduct into the darkness and dampness of a cellar.
ENGLISH   And she came up saying: \"You are quite right.
FRENCH   Lui, effaré, étonné de cette brusque attaque, ne trouvait pas une parole.
FRENCH   Un silence embarrassé régna.
FRENCH    Cependant, Pauline la questionnait encore, amicalement.
ENGLISH   The matter, however, deserved thinking over; perhaps it would be worth his while to risk some annoyance.
ENGLISH   It ruined his composition.
FRENCH   Les prix, au lieu d\'être faits comme autrefois par une cinquantaine de maisons, sont faits aujourd\'hui par quatre ou cinq, qui les ont baissés, grâce à la puissance de leurs capitaux et à la force de leur clientèle...
FRENCH    -- Je le connais, bonne maison, laissa échapper Mouret.
ENGLISH   The department had brought out all its white articles, and there, as everywhere else, was a riot of white fit for the garmenting of a troop of shivering cupids: white cloth cloaks, white piqué, nainsook and cashmere dresses, white sailor costumes, and even white Zouave ones.
FRENCH    -- Oh! lui, pour sûr! déclara Vallagnosc.
ENGLISH   This branch of commerce was now based on a rapid and continual turning over of capital, which it was necessary to convert into goods as often as possible in the same year.
ENGLISH   He guessed the whole scene.
FRENCH    LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the \"Right of Replacement or Refund\" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
ENGLISH   The figure increased daily, he ought to have been delighted.
ENGLISH   It\'s your business.\"  Denise again commenced to place the pins, without saying a word.
FRENCH    -- Ayez donc les femmes, dit-il tout bas au baron, en riant d\'un rire hardi, vous vendrez le monde!  Maintenant, le baron comprenait.
FRENCH    Elle se pencha, elle aperçut Bourras, immobile au bout de la rue, devant la vitrine où elle avait remarqué, le matin, toute une construction ingénieuse, faite avec des parapluies et des cannes.
ENGLISH   \"Do what you like with me.\"  Then she resumed gaily: \"That is right, sir.
ENGLISH   He even ventured to say when they were alone: \"That girl again! Be careful; it will end by becoming serious!\"  But Mouret hastily defended himself, concealing his emotion beneath an air of superior indifference.
ENGLISH    Denise, however, had not come down with the other young ladies at eight o\'clock.
ENGLISH   Besides, the adventure amused him, and he promised to look into the matter.
FRENCH    -- Je vous en prie, acceptez, ne me laissez pas ce chagrin.
FRENCH    La gaieté redoubla, on blaguait le petit Bavoux; pourtant, il y avait sous les rires une grande considération.
FRENCH    -- Tu l\'as donc vue, tu regardais? murmura-t-il, glacé de la sentir complice.
FRENCH   Et s\'ils achetaient la maison?  Bourras, qui terminait la langue de son dogue, s\'absorbait une minute, avec un rire d\'enfant vaguement épandu sur sa face neigeuse de Père éternel.
ENGLISH   He loved her, then? Suddenly she understood everything; she felt the growing flame of desire with which he had enveloped her ever since her return to the shop.
ENGLISH   Another employee at the end of the counter then marked them in plain figures, and the checking finished, the invoice, signed by the manager, had to be sent to the chief cashier\'s office.
FRENCH    We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
FRENCH    -- Je crois que ces dames vous ruinent, reprit Vallagnosc, amusé par la rencontre.
ENGLISH    \"Come,\" resumed Pauline, \"I assure you that Baugé won\'t bring any one.
ENGLISH    \"In short, mademoiselle,\" he resumed, once more placing the table between himself and her, \"try and look to your appearance.
FRENCH   Non, j\'ai soupé avec Héloïse, la petite des Folies.
FRENCH   On verrait, on lui parlerait.
ENGLISH    \"Hullo!\" said Hutin in Favier\'s ear; \"there\'s the drab we saw on the Place Gaillon.\"  Mouret, whilst affecting to listen to Bourdoncle and Robineau, was at heart flattered by the startled look of this poor girl, just as a marchioness might be by the brutal admiration of a passing drayman.
ENGLISH   Moreover some two days previously he had boldly told her of the intrigue between Mouret and Clara, He had not done this with any calculating motive but out of sheer stupidity, like a fellow who loves a joke.
FRENCH   Vous avez les yeux bouffis de sommeil, vous vous alourdissez, à être trop sage...
ENGLISH   When he overtook Mouret, he found him downstairs, in the Saint-Augustin Hall, opposite the entrance door, where he was shouting:  \"Are you playing the fool with me? I ordered the blue parasols to be put as a border.
FRENCH    -- Et vous êtes-vous divertie?...
FRENCH    Il parlait des vendeurs de la mercerie.
ENGLISH   But it was on the silk department especially that the customers had flung themselves with the greatest ardour.
FRENCH   Elle serait tombée aux bras de cet homme, la chair prise, le coeur séduit, si elle n\'avait éprouvé une révolte, presque une répulsion devant le don définitif de son être, jeté à l\'inconnu du lendemain.
FRENCH   C\'était une somnolence, une sieste d\'été, au milieu du vide élargi des comptoirs, pareils à des chapelles, où l\'ombre dort, après la dernière messe.
FRENCH   Marguerite s\'était remise à tailler son crayon, dont la mine cassait toujours.
ENGLISH    And the long walk commenced along the crowded galleries.
ENGLISH   Unfortunately, everybody here is not of the same opinion as myself.
ENGLISH   His colonel in bygone days had killed himself for a similar little thing, with an insignificant face, delicate and modest, one look from whom had ravaged all hearts.
FRENCH   On eût dit que le colosse, après ses agrandissements successifs, pris de honte et de répugnance pour le quartier noir, où il était né modestement, et qu\'il avait plus tard égorgé, venait de lui tourner le dos, laissant la boue des rues étroites sur ses derrières, présentant sa face de parvenu à la voie tapageuse et ensoleillée du nouveau Paris.
ENGLISH    \"Come in, come in,\" repeated Baudu.
FRENCH   Quelques vendeurs s\'en étaient allés, flânant le long du corridor, cherchant les coins noirs pour fumer une cigarette.
ENGLISH   The more so as the dear lady is not exactly a saint, if all people say be true.
FRENCH   Mais, comme elle entrait dans la rue, Denise fut reprise par une vitrine, où étaient exposées des confections pour dames.
ENGLISH    And as they had arrived at the mantle department, he went in.
ENGLISH   Then on entering the narrow shop, and observing that he still eyed her with an astonished air, she told him of her departure from the Paradise and of her desire not to trouble her uncle.
ENGLISH   And the marvel, the altar of this religion of white was a tent formed of white curtains, which hung from the glazed roof above the silk counter, in the great hall.
FRENCH   Mais, avec son sens délicat de la femme, il sentait chez cette jeune fille un charme caché, une force de grâce et de tendresse, ignorée d\'elle-même.
FRENCH   Nous avons bu une tasse de lait dans un café, devant la gare.
ENGLISH    This was a lost corner of the vast world where the people of The Ladies\' Paradise bestirred themselves.
FRENCH   Deux figures allégoriques, deux femmes riantes, la gorge nue et renversée, déroulaient l\'enseigne: _Au Bonheur des Dames_.
FRENCH   Il dramatisait simplement ses besoins d\'argent, il y avait toujours au fond quelque nécessité immédiate.
FRENCH    Dans la salle à manger, le gaz brûlait, bien qu\'on fût aux longs jours de l\'été.
FRENCH   Aucun, du reste, ne tâchait de savoir, bien que tous, à chacune de ses apparitions, se permissent des hypothèses, simplement pour causer.
ENGLISH   Whilst Denise went off to fetch the cloaks, Madame Desforges, who was looking round, perceived her face in a glass; and she continued contemplating herself.
ENGLISH   And in the midst of the crowd was inspector Jouve, walking about gravely, on the look-out for thieves.
FRENCH    General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works  1.A.
ENGLISH   The girls of her department had discovered her friendship with Pauline, and thought they detected a certain bravado in this display of affection for a saleswoman of a rival counter.
ENGLISH   And all was soon settled.
ENGLISH    \"At Cornaille\'s.\"  \"I know him--good house,\" remarked Mouret.
ENGLISH   It was a pillage of material, a ransacking of all the shops, an appetite for luxury seeking satisfaction in toilettes envied and dreamed of--with such happiness at finding themselves in an atmosphere of finery, that they buried themselves in it, as in warm air necessary to their existence.
ENGLISH   She considered life a matter of logic, good conduct, and courage.
FRENCH   Jamais Mme Desforges ne s\'affichait, on la recevait partout, dans la haute bourgeoisie où elle était née.
ENGLISH    The ladies had just extricated themselves.
ENGLISH   Don\'t be frightened.\"  A great shudder shook Madame Robineau.
ENGLISH    \"Don\'t draw back, you are not at all in my way,\" said Denise, seized with pity.
FRENCH   Alors, je dois régaler cinq personnes, deux hommes et trois femmes...
ENGLISH   It all began with the dead white of calico and linen, and the dull white of flannel and cloth; then came the velvets, silks, and satins--quite an ascending gamut, the white gradually lighting up and finally emitting little flashes at its folds; and then it flew away in the transparencies of the curtains, became diffuse brightness with the muslins, the guipures, the laces and especially the tulles, so light and airy that they formed the extreme final note; whilst the silver of the oriental silk sounded higher than all else in the depths of the giant alcove.
ENGLISH   Leaning out of the window she had a sudden vision of Valognes, the deserted street and grassy pavement, which she had seen from her room as a child; and she was seized with a desire to go and live there once more--to seek refuge in the peace and forgetfulness of the country.
ENGLISH   Well! she goes about with everybody, she laughs at you, and will never marry you.\"  He listened to her, turning very pale; and at each of the sentences she threw in his face, his lips quivered.
FRENCH   Mais Vallagnosc, lorsqu\'il ne craignit plus une arrestation immédiate, n\'accepta pas l\'aventure avec cette belle tranquillité.
ENGLISH   This happened to be \"the pretty lady,\" that beautiful blonde of whom the whole department occasionally spoke, without knowing anything of her life or even her name.
FRENCH   Je sais bien qu\'ils me l\'ont volé, comme ils nous volent tout.
ENGLISH   \"There are some boots at twenty francs and a half the pair which are delicious!\"  A salesman was following them, dragging along the eternal chair, on which a mountain of articles was already heaped.
ENGLISH   Denise also smiled.
FRENCH   N\'est-ce pas fini?  Tremblante, Denise quitta le bord de la couchette, comme si, d\'un souffle, elle eût craint de détruire cette nudité misérable.
FRENCH   Et vos cheveux, est-il possible de les massacrer ainsi! Ils seraient superbes, si vous vouliez.
FRENCH    Lhomme, la tête basse, écrivait de nouveau.
FRENCH   À Valognes, elle fredonnait le refrain sentimental, en regardant la rue déserte.
FRENCH   Du moment que ça ne t\'a pas dégoûtée d\'être salement flanquée à la porte, c\'est que tu dois avoir des raisons solides pour les aimer; et tu y rentrerais, vois-tu, que je ne t\'en voudrais pas du tout...
ENGLISH   Then he stammered out: \"I love her!\"  Denise felt ashamed of herself.
ENGLISH   The walls reeked with moisture, a slow asphyxia fell from the mouldy vaulted ceiling.
ENGLISH    \"What! ten francs?\" she murmured.
ENGLISH   It had been a splendid year.
ENGLISH   A person loses herself and commits all sorts of follies.\"  On the great central landing there was scarcely room for the chair to pass, as Mouret had just blocked the open space with a lot of fancy goods--cups mounted on gilt zinc, flash dressing-cases and liqueur stands--being of opinion that the crowd there was not sufficiently great, and that circulation was too easy.
FRENCH   Deux petites filles manquèrent d\'être étouffées.
FRENCH   La moquette rouge étouffait le bruit des pas, la voix haute et lointaine du rez-de-chaussée se mourait, ce n\'était plus que le murmure discret; la chaleur d\'un salon, alourdie par toute une cohue de femmes.
ENGLISH   Robineau, using his adversary\'s weapons, had advertised extensively in the newspapers.
ENGLISH   Was not this merely a jealous woman\'s remark? However, she did not give him time to question her, but added: \"In short, you know what a great interest I take in you.
ENGLISH   She was a superb woman, with the neck and shoulders of a goddess, a large regular face, and big sleepy eyes.
FRENCH    Et ce fut pour elle l\'excuse suprême, elle ne compta plus, elle acheta encore, avec le sourd besoin de tout garder, car elle n\'était pas des femmes qui rendent.
FRENCH    Et il sortit, après avoir salué Gaujean et Robineau.
ENGLISH   He jumped off the stool where another salesman took his place, and he was obliged to climb over the mountain of materials with which the floor was littered.
ENGLISH    \"What! Already?\" suddenly exclaimed Hutin.
FRENCH    -- Sauvée! murmura Pauline.
FRENCH   Mais elle a voulu quand même nous aider.
ENGLISH   When she perceived the latter\'s swollen eyes, she gently chided him.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s very thoughtless of you, my dear child.
ENGLISH   It was the last fever of the clearing, the machine seemed ready to burst; and past the plate-glass windows all round the closed shop there still went a few pedestrians, pale with the stifling boredom of a summer Sunday.
FRENCH    -- Donnez les listes à monsieur, dit la première en entrant.
ENGLISH   Daughter of a clerk of small means, she was ruining her husband, the fifth-class professor at the Lycée Bonaparte, who in order to meet the constantly increasing expenses of the household was compelled to double his income of six thousand francs by giving private lessons.
ENGLISH   This was at the further end of the hall, around one of the slender wrought-iron columns which supported the glass roof.
ENGLISH   Just so! a fellow of very clear intelligence, whose knowledge is confined to spelling, and the first four rules of arithmetic.
FRENCH    Debout devant elle, il souriait d\'un air paterne.
FRENCH   Il venait de se rappeler «la mal peignée», comme la nommait Bourdoncle; et lui qui répugnait d\'ordinaire au rôle de gendarme, il avait eu l\'idée de la faire comparaître pour la secouer un peu, si elle était toujours fagotée en provinciale.
ENGLISH   Denise, as quietly as possible for fear of attracting attention, sought to console her.
FRENCH   Il y eut une exclamation.
FRENCH   Elle eut un faible sourire.
FRENCH    -- Oh! mon chéri...
ENGLISH   There, in the open street, on the very pavement, she beheld a mass of cheap goods--doorway temptations, bargains to attract the passer-by.
FRENCH    -- Passez donc la carafe à Deloche, dit tranquillement Mignot.
FRENCH   Et, sous les cris, jetés sans relâche, qui se croisaient de toutes parts, la même nouvelle circulait avec une rapidité surprenante: chaque vendeur savait déjà que Mouret avait écrit le matin, pour inviter Denise à dîner.
FRENCH   À Nogent, une noce débarqua, au milieu des rires.
FRENCH   Et sa pensée s\'égarait, tâchait de le juger.
ENGLISH   \"What! How do you mean?\"  \"Yes, that great booby Deloche let it out to us.
FRENCH   C\'est à les gifler, des fois.
FRENCH   Ce n\'étaient plus les vitrines froides de la matinée; maintenant, elles paraissaient comme chauffées et vibrantes de la trépidation intérieure.
FRENCH    -- Ah bien! reprit l\'autre, elle a dû en pleurer...
FRENCH   Mais il s\'arrêta, il chercha Denise, surpris de ne pas la voir.
FRENCH    Et, malgré la présence de son oncle, elle conjura le vieillard d\'accepter.
FRENCH    En bas, comme elle entrait au rayon, une querelle éclatait.
FRENCH   C\'était la bataille décisive, il avait l\'idée téméraire de battre le Bonheur des Dames sur son terrain, en faisant des concessions au luxe moderne.
FRENCH   Une heure plus tard, elle avait envoyé un commissionnaire chercher sa malle, elle était installée.
FRENCH   Sans doute, c\'était la personne dont on lui avait parlé, cette amie que le patron voyait au-dehors.
ENGLISH   Yes, she is close by, opposite the fountain.
FRENCH   Il devint jaloux.
FRENCH   Comment! vous ne le saviez pas?  La table entière le savait, on était fatigué d\'en causer depuis le matin.
ENGLISH    That night also proved a sleepless one for Denise.
FRENCH    -- Est-ce que ma tante se doute de quelque chose?  -- Oui, maman se doute, je crois...
ENGLISH    \"Now,\" said she, \"I\'m going for my braid.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle hochait la tête.
FRENCH   Oh! madame mettrait davantage, il était impossible avec deux cents francs que madame trouvât quelque chose de convenable.
FRENCH   Sans doute Denise sentit derrière elle cette indifférence et cette rancune, car elle descendit l\'escalier avec le même trouble qu\'elle l\'avait monté, en proie à une singulière angoisse, se demandant si elle devait se désespérer ou se réjouir d\'être venue.
FRENCH   Des dames ôtaient leurs gants, écrivaient des lettres sur du papier au chiffre de la maison, dont elles biffaient l\'en-tête d\'un trait de plume.
FRENCH   Mais, ce jour-là, comme ils se baisaient à pleine bouche, dans un angle du corridor, Denise qui montait également déjeuner, les surprit.
ENGLISH    The shopmen continued to arrive, and Denise could now hear them joking as they passed, casting side glances towards her.
ENGLISH   As you are here you can sleep upstairs to-night; after that, we\'ll see.\"  Then, as he glanced at them, Madame Baudu and Geneviève understood that they were free to arrange matters.
FRENCH   Et puis, monsieur, vous aimez une personne, oui, cette dame qui vient ici...
FRENCH    -- Oh! répondit-il, un article extraordinaire, une faille à gros grain, souple, solide...
FRENCH   Tandis qu\'il la complimentait et qu\'il faisait quelques pas près d\'elle, en maître de maison galant, elle réfléchissait, elle se demandait comment le convaincre de sa trahison.
FRENCH   Une lueur blanche jaillissait des toiles et des calicots de la galerie Monsigny, pareille à la bande vive qui blanchit le ciel la première du côté de l\'Orient; tandis que, le long de la galerie Michodière, la mercerie et la passementerie, les articles de Paris et les rubans, jetaient des reflets de coteaux éloignés, l\'éclair blanc des boutons de nacre, des bronzes argentés et des perles.
ENGLISH   \"But The Old Elbeuf will never give way! I said as much to Bourras, you know, \'Neighbour,\' said I \'you\'re going over to the cheapjacks; your paint and your varnish are a disgrace to you.\'\"  \"Eat your dinner!\" interrupted Madame Baudu, feeling anxious, on seeing him so excited.
ENGLISH   Pauline relieved her mind.
FRENCH    -- Elle n\'est pas assez belle, disait celle-ci.
ENGLISH   A pause ensued, but at last he said to Denise: \"You\'ll see her presently.
ENGLISH   \"What an old fool he is! One would think he was running off to meet his girl!\"  Lhomme, with his nose in the air, and his instrument under his arm, was spinning along past the Gymnase Theatre, laughing with delight at the thought of the treat in store for him.
FRENCH   Mais Bouthemont venait de reconnaître Mme Desforges, et désireux de faire sa cour à une belle personne qu\'on prétendait toute puissante sur le patron, il s\'avançait avec son amabilité un peu grosse.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! You know very well that we\'ll stand by you to the last,\" Bourdoncle finished by saying.
FRENCH   Et Mme Aurélie appela Denise.
ENGLISH   He repeated his words, adding: \"It would do no good to either of us.\"  \"All right, uncle,\" at last she replied, with a painful effort, \"I\'ll try to manage all the same.\"  The Baudus were not bad sort of people.
ENGLISH   Just fancy, he has been leading the saleswomen astray! Yes, and he gets them cravats to make!\"  \"Silence!\" muttered Favier.
ENGLISH   You have long known it, pray don\'t be so cruel as to play the ignorant.
FRENCH    -- Regarde donc, maman, murmura Valentine, c\'est trop commun.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! mademoiselle, avez-vous réussi? lui demanda une voix émue, comme elle était enfin sur le trottoir.
ENGLISH   A single gas jet lighted and warmed the little dining-room which reeked with the smell of food.
FRENCH    -- Madame Aurélie, je vous prie?  -- C\'est moi.
ENGLISH   \"I will do the honours of the house for you.\"  She got up, took the teapot, and filled the cups.
FRENCH   Vous êtes une bonne petite fille, je sais que vous lui rendez la vie dure, à cet homme qui vous croyait à vendre comme ma maison.
FRENCH   Il avait dû répondre, n\'est-ce pas? et puis, est-ce qu\'on pouvait s\'attendre à une pareille histoire pour des bêtises? Sur quoi donc marchait le patron, depuis quelque temps, qu\'il devenait indécrottable?  -- Oh! sur quoi il marche, on le sait, reprit Hutin.
ENGLISH   Madame Marty, meantime, seemed agitated by some secret trouble.
ENGLISH   They have a bird embroidered at one corner.\"  The shopman cracked up the article, swore that it was all silk, that the manufacturer had become bankrupt, and that they would never have such a bargain again.
ENGLISH   They had to turn up the Rue Saint-Roch again, and once more pass The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   On commençait à sortir, le saccage des étoffes jonchait les comptoirs, l\'or sonnait dans les caisses; tandis que la clientèle, dépouillée, violée, s\'en allait à moitié défaite, avec la volupté assouvie et la sourde honte d\'un désir contenté au fond d\'un hôtel louche.
FRENCH   Il y avait des fleurs métalliques, des chardons d\'argent, des épis d\'argent.
FRENCH   Allez, sans mes douleurs...
FRENCH    Toutes les femmes présentes furent de son avis.
ENGLISH   At last she no longer felt the stuffy air and the heavy stones of The Ladies\' Paradise weighing her down! She had the prospect of a long day in the country before her! and it was like a new lease of life, an infinite delight, into which she entered with all the glee of a little child.
FRENCH    -- Mon oncle, vous ne pouvez rester ainsi.
FRENCH    -- À propos, reprit Favier, vous savez qu\'elle reste.
ENGLISH   But up above, just outside the mantle department, she was again seized with terror on perceiving a lantern twinkling in the darkness and moving forward.
FRENCH   Chacun des trente-neuf rayons faisait sa besogne à part, sans s\'inquiéter des rayons voisins.
FRENCH   Puis, elle passa l\'uniforme de son rayon, une robe de soie noire, qu\'on avait retouchée pour elle, et qui l\'attendait sur le lit.
FRENCH   Mon Dieu! que je suis donc furieux contre moi! Je me flanquerais des gifles!  Il lui avait pris les mains, il les baisait, les mouillait de larmes.
FRENCH    Alors, elle haussa la voix de façon à être entendue.
FRENCH   Autour d\'eux, la nuit pâlissait encore, ils distinguaient les joncs de la rive, la dentelle des ombrages, noire sur le scintillement des étoiles; et un apaisement leur venait, ils oubliaient leurs maux, rapprochés par leur malchance, dans une amitié de bons camarades.
FRENCH   Mais la chaleur d\'usine dont la maison flambait, venait surtout de la vente, de la bousculade des comptoirs, qu\'on sentait derrière les murs.
ENGLISH   Then, after a long string of people, came three mourning coaches.
FRENCH   C\'était en elle un froid de glace, comme si, goutte à goutte, le sang de son coeur se fût retiré.
ENGLISH   Hutin was again displaying some condescension towards Favier, but the latter, thin and frigid with a bilious look, gave him a sly glance as if to count how many mouthfuls this short, little fellow would make, and to imply that he was waiting till he had swallowed up Bouthemont, in order to eat him afterwards.
ENGLISH   What had she at heart, that such a flame should have risen in her breast?  \"Dear me, no!\" she replied.
FRENCH   Il était seul, debout, le visage sombre, au-dessus des millions écroulés à ses pieds.
ENGLISH   He was still walking with the muffled tread with which he had quitted the sick room, and murmured, as though he might be overheard upstairs, \"She\'s asleep.\"  Then, thoroughly worn out, he sat down on a chair, mopping his forehead with a mechanical gesture and puffing like a man who has just finished some hard work.
ENGLISH   It was all over, they must bow their heads.
FRENCH   Rien que du blanc, tous les articles blancs de chaque rayon, une débauche de blanc, un astre blanc dont le rayonnement fixe aveuglait d\'abord, sans qu\'on pût distinguer les détails, au milieu de cette blancheur unique.
FRENCH   Il faut que j\'aie leur secret.
FRENCH    Ils parlaient de Mouret.
FRENCH    La table se remplissait rapidement.
FRENCH    Aussi pourquoi se refusait-elle avec une pareille obstination? Vingt fois, il l\'avait suppliée, augmentant ses offres, offrant de l\'argent, beaucoup d\'argent.
FRENCH   Puis, son coeur battit violemment.
ENGLISH   However, after waiting a moment, she ventured to put another question: \"Do you think Madame Aurélie will be back soon?\"  Thereupon, the second-hand, a thin, ugly woman, whom she had not noticed before, a widow with a projecting jaw-bone and coarse hair, cried out from a cupboard, board, where she was checking some tickets: \"You\'d better wait if you want to speak to Madame Aurélie herself.\" And, addressing another saleswoman, she added: \"Isn\'t she downstairs?\"  \"No, Madame Frédéric, I don\'t think so,\" was the reply.
FRENCH   de Boves restait dans un fauteuil, cloué par des accès de goutte.
ENGLISH    \"I really think I shall lose my skirts in this crowd,\" remarked Madame de Boves.
FRENCH   Tenez! cette brune à la ganterie, celle à qui Mignot essaie des gants.
ENGLISH   But she, with her elbow on the velvet counter and her wrist raised, surrendered her fingers to him with the same unconcerned air as that with which she gave her foot to her maid so that she might button her boot.
FRENCH   C\'était pourtant un classement d\'une logique absolue, les tissus d\'un côté, les objets confectionnés de l\'autre, un ordre intelligent qui devait permettre aux clientes de se diriger elles-mêmes.
FRENCH    -- Vous! vous! balbutia-t-il.
ENGLISH   Denise hastened to add: \"Oh, I\'m very strong!\"  Madame Aurélie shrugged her broad shoulders and then coldly remarked: \"Well! I don\'t mind entering your name.
FRENCH   de Boves eut le geste d\'un mari d\'autant plus sûr de la raison de sa femme, qu\'il ne lui donne pas un sou.
FRENCH   Elle, une voleuse! pour qui la prenait-il? Elle était la comtesse de Boves, son mari, inspecteur général des haras, allait à la Cour.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle, however, had overheard Mouret, and looked at him with a smile.
ENGLISH   \"For instance, here\'s this fan.
FRENCH   «Vous étiez assis, monsieur: passez à la caisse! -- Vous répondez, je crois: passez à la caisse! -- Vos souliers ne sont pas cirés: passez à la caisse!» Et les braves eux-mêmes tremblaient, devant le massacre qu\'il laissait derrière lui.
ENGLISH   \"She said nothing before going, so she can\'t be far off.\"  Denise, thus meagrely informed, remained standing.
FRENCH   Ce dernier, ayant remarqué que les marchandises démodées, les rossignols, s\'enlevaient d\'autant plus rapidement que la guelte donnée aux commis était plus forte, avait basé sur cette observation un nouveau commerce.
FRENCH   On racontait vingt anecdotes, un petit jeune homme qui en était tombé malade, jusqu\'à des clientes qu\'il avait humiliées par ses remarques cassantes.
ENGLISH   But when it\'s a pretty girl----\"  And thereupon he came closer still, and she felt really afraid.
FRENCH   Je pensais à vous.
ENGLISH   Just then the footman ushered in the professor, who had called to take her home.
FRENCH   Pour Mme Desforges.
FRENCH   C\'est bien votre compte, n\'est-ce pas?  -- Oui, monsieur...
ENGLISH   On her side the girl had got to love him with the gravity of her reserved nature, full of a real deep passion of which she was not aware, in the regulated monotony of her daily life.
FRENCH   Peut-être qu\'il ne veut tuer personne.
ENGLISH    No doubt Mouret understood why she was blushing, for he quickly added: \"Listen, mademoiselle, I have to apologize to you.
FRENCH   Il y avait comme un élargissement continu, un rayonnement de la clientèle, remportée aux quatre points de la cité, vidant les magasins avec la clameur ronflante d\'une écluse.
FRENCH   Ces dames se rapprochaient, causaient plus haut, toutes aux paroles sans fin qui se croisaient; pendant que M.
FRENCH   Une singulière pudeur de femme l\'avait toujours empêchée d\'aborder avec lui certains sujets de tendresse délicate.
FRENCH   Et elle s\'était mise immédiatement à rétrécir la robe, elle avait passé une heure devant l\'étroit miroir, le peigne dans ses cheveux, sans pouvoir les réduire, comme elle l\'aurait voulu.
ENGLISH   At each minute the cry of a messenger was heard, and a cab drew near, or a brougham came forth from the ranks, took up a customer and went off at a rapid trot.
ENGLISH   Do you love any one?\"  She turned very red, her heart was in her mouth, and she felt all falsehood impossible in the presence of the emotion which was betraying her, the repugnance for lying which made the truth appear in her face in spite of all.
FRENCH   Bien que celle-ci n\'eût jamais fait une confidence à personne, on la soupçonnait d\'avoir quitté les nouveautés, pour épouser le propriétaire d\'un établissement de bains, du côté des Halles.
ENGLISH   Lhomme jotted down the articles whilst Joseph checked him by keeping another list.
FRENCH   La jeune fille, d\'un air affairé, comme si elle courait de caisse en caisse, à la recherche d\'une erreur, gagna l\'escalier et descendit dans le hall.
FRENCH   Enfin, Mme Aurélie la fit asseoir devant une table; et il fut entendu qu\'elle se contenterait d\'inscrire les articles appelés.
ENGLISH   Then, Vallagnosc, who seemed to be inwardly amused by Mouret\'s emotion, finished by asking in his bantering voice: \"Are you enjoying yourself?\"  Mouret did not appear to understand him at first.
ENGLISH   Jean, however, had disappeared, and this made his sister anxious.
ENGLISH   It was already tottering.
FRENCH   Voyons, vous autres! n\'ayez donc pas des figures d\'enterrement!  Il ne put les égayer, lui-même retombait dans une consternation blême; et tous restaient les yeux sur le monstre, attirés, possédés, se rassasiant de leur malheur.
FRENCH    Pépé, cependant, finissait par grimper sur les genoux de Bourras.
ENGLISH   A few minutes elapsed, nobody being charitable enough to extricate the young girl from her uncomfortable position.
ENGLISH   Since her death Octave ever thought of her with tender regret, grateful as he felt to her for the fortune she had bestowed on him with her hand.
FRENCH    The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
FRENCH   Sa nomination de première avait abattu autour d\'elle les dernières résistances.
FRENCH   C\'était l\'heure où la cohue, fouettée de réclames, achevait de se détraquer; les soixante mille francs d\'annonces payés aux journaux, les dix mille affiches collées sur les murs, les deux cent mille catalogues lancés dans la circulation, après avoir vidé les bourses, laissaient à ces nerfs de femmes l\'ébranlement de leur ivresse; et elles restaient secouées encore de toutes les inventions de Mouret, la baisse des prix, les rendus, les galanteries sans cesse renaissantes.
FRENCH   Imaginez-vous qu\'il a prétexté mes embellissements; oui, il a fait valoir que la maison venait d\'être remise à neuf...
FRENCH   Depuis le renvoi de son fils, Mme Aurélie tremblait, car elle sentait ces messieurs devenir froids, et elle voyait de jour en jour grandir la puissance de la jeune fille.
FRENCH   Justement, il y a la femme du papetier...
ENGLISH   Then, when she had finished, he shook his head.
FRENCH   La lutte devenait impossible, il se battait contre une force supérieure, il ne pouvait, sans démence, refuser la fortune qui se présentait.
FRENCH   Et jamais elle n\'avait vu cela, une admiration la clouait sur le trottoir.
ENGLISH   \"At Lyons they are all furious with you, they pretend that your cheap trading is ruining them.
FRENCH   Et elle la comblait d\'amitiés, la traitait désormais en égale, allait causer souvent avec elle, dans le rayon voisin, d\'un air d\'apparat, comme une reine mère rendant visite à une jeune reine.
ENGLISH   But at last, in his brave way, he exclaimed aloud: \"If you want any assistance, take a girl from the workroom.
ENGLISH   So they remained standing, mingling with the crowd of ladies who were looking at the silks and feeling them, staying there for hours without making up their minds.
ENGLISH   The draper was full of vague projects.
FRENCH   Elle restait entre les deux, levait sa jolie tête, allait de l\'un à l\'autre; et, dans sa robe de dentelle qui découvrait ses poignets et son cou délicats, elle avait un air ravi, à les voir si bien d\'accord.
ENGLISH   But everybody must live; where would they all be if, under the pretext of conducing to the general welfare, the consumer was fattened at the expense of the producer? And then began a long discussion.
ENGLISH    Mouret was still speaking.
FRENCH    -- Pardon, c\'est mon tour, dit Denise révoltée.
ENGLISH   What most filled them with indignation was the sight of one of the four delivery vans just introduced by Mouret, which was standing in the Rue de la Michodière, in front of the delivery office.
ENGLISH   Metal ladders and bridges rose on all sides, describing a lacework of iron in the air; whilst the kitchen chimney belched forth as much smoke as a factory, and the great square cistern, supported aloft by cast-iron pillars, assumed the strange silhouette of some barbarous structure erected at this height by the pride of one man.
FRENCH   Il jouissait d\'ailleurs d\'une liberté absolue, il achetait comme bon lui semblait, pourvu que, chaque année, il augmentât dans une proportion fixée d\'avance le chiffre d\'affaires de son comptoir; et c\'était même sur cette augmentation qu\'il touchait son tant pour cent d\'intérêt.
FRENCH   Je ferai la commission, mais je doute de réussir.
FRENCH    -- Oh! tout à l\'heure, rien ne presse.
ENGLISH   She moved nearer, again attracted and, as it were, warmed by that ardent blaze.
FRENCH   Silencieusement, elle tendit les lèvres, les appuya sur les siennes; puis, à voix basse:  -- Chut! on m\'attend...
FRENCH   Mais il revint lui-même sur ses pas, il la suivit sous les ombres noires des grands marronniers.
ENGLISH   But I am an old fool, and saw through nothing; I didn\'t know that people fell ill over such things.
ENGLISH   And Mouret\'s evident kindliness did not reassure her; she was still afraid of him, feeling whenever near him that uneasiness which she attributed to natural anxiety in the presence of a powerful man on whom her future depended.
ENGLISH    The draper thereupon gave an account of his fruitless errand, adding that Denise had heard of a situation; and, pointing to The Ladies\' Paradise with a scornful gesture, he exclaimed: \"There--in there!\"  The whole family felt hurt at the idea.
ENGLISH   And pray don\'t cry any more.
FRENCH   La violence du patron les avait tous saisis.
ENGLISH    \"I\'ll have my revenge,\" she murmured, \"I\'ll have my revenge, if he behaves badly!\"  Bouthemont continued to hold her hands in his.
FRENCH   Mais, en haut, devant le rayon des confections, une terreur la saisit en apercevant une lanterne, dont l\'oeil clignotant marchait: c\'était une ronde, deux pompiers en train de marquer leur passage aux cadrans des indicateurs.
ENGLISH   Yes, you were that girl\'s comrade, and I\'ve seen Colomban run after you, and talk to you in a low voice.
ENGLISH   The greater the crush the better; all will go well!\" He laughed, and then deigned to explain his idea, lowering his voice: \"Look here, Bourdoncle, this is what the result will be.
ENGLISH   Perhaps he had loved her from the very first, even at the time when he had thought that he felt nothing but pity for her.
ENGLISH   Still I have my revenge, I assure you.
FRENCH   Le père défaillait, en se demandant où pouvait aller ce continuel flot de marchandises; tandis que la mère, malade du tourment de sa fille, continuait à regarder sans voir, les yeux noyés de grosses larmes.
ENGLISH   It was cool as well, and a silence fell from the ceiling.
FRENCH    -- Moi, je leur ai tiré ma révérence...
ENGLISH   \"You shan\'t have it, even if you invade the whole street!\"  Denise now had something to eat each day, and she was extremely grateful to the old umbrella-dealer, realizing that he had a good heart beneath his strange, violent ways.
FRENCH   Il y a une accoucheuse attachée au comptoir des confections.
FRENCH    Et, revenant à Denise:  -- Je vous en prie, réfléchissez...
FRENCH   Lorsque, une heure plus tard, elle revint doucement avec lui rue de la Michodière, elle avait son tranquille visage de fille raisonnable.
ENGLISH   In a month\'s time you could have had it for ten francs.
FRENCH   Est-ce que la seconde n\'était pas une bonne camarade? ses affaires ne regardaient personne.
FRENCH   Mais il eut encore la douleur de voir que Robineau était en train de vendre à Mme Boutarel un fort métrage de soie.
FRENCH   C\'est le fruitier qui m\'écrit.
FRENCH   Je l\'attends, il devrait être ici.
ENGLISH   A fine school for honesty!\"  \"Hang it!\" replied Mouret, \"though we make them quite at home, we can\'t let them take the goods away under their mantles.
FRENCH   Elle qui n\'avait jamais été malade, qui était si bien portante, si belle!...
FRENCH   Il retourna vers son bureau, où il feuilleta des papiers qu\'il reposa tout de suite, en disant:  -- Je ne vous retiens plus, mademoiselle, je ne puis vous garder malgré vous.
FRENCH    Mouret eut la force de sourire.
FRENCH   Tous deux se levèrent, passèrent dans le grand salon.
FRENCH    -- Je prendrai celui-ci, le Louis XIV, à bouquets de roses, dit enfin Mme Desforges.
ENGLISH   She sometimes met them in the Rue Saint-Roch, on leaving the shop in the evening.
FRENCH   Depuis sa brouille avec le Bonheur des Dames, ce dernier rêvait de susciter au colosse des concurrences; il croyait la victoire certaine, si l\'on créait dans le voisinage plusieurs spécialités, où les clientes trouveraient un choix très varié d\'articles.
FRENCH   Nous y resterons tous.
FRENCH   Elle finit par chercher les soulagements possibles, sa bonté rêva longtemps aux moyens à prendre, pour sauver au moins les siens de l\'écrasement final.
ENGLISH   On going downstairs, still greatly excited, she had met Deloche in the lace department, and, without noticing that Liénard was talking to the young man, had immediately relieved her mind of the secret.
ENGLISH     The next day Denise had scarcely been downstairs half an hour, when Madame Aurélie said to her in her sharp voice: \"You are wanted at the director\'s office, mademoiselle.\"  The girl found Mouret alone, in his spacious room hung with green rep.
FRENCH    -- Non, c\'est impossible...
FRENCH   Les mots s\'embrouillaient davantage sur ses lèvres, il attendait, chez Colomban, un élan, un cri du coeur, qui ne venait point.
ENGLISH    \"Have you got ten francs?\" he stammered.
FRENCH   Mais, brusquement, elle se passionna, lorsqu\'elle apprit de la bouche de Bourdoncle qu\'il venait de trouver au fond du sous-sol, son fils en train d\'embrasser une lingère, cette vendeuse à qui le jeune homme glissait des lettres.
ENGLISH   In his thin, shiny frock-coat he looked more shrivelled than ever by all his hard toil.
ENGLISH   Bourras, however, still continued, in a fainter voice, as if fatigued by the difficult ascent of the Rue Blanche:  \"As for me, I\'m settled.
ENGLISH   \"If you believe me to be innocent, I will remain.
ENGLISH    \"Perhaps this young gentleman would like to take something?\" said Madame Baudu, smiling at Pépé.
FRENCH    Denise, le visage toujours caché, répondait non d\'un branle énergique de la tête.
FRENCH    Lorsque Mouret entra dans le petit salon, il n\'y trouva plus que Vallagnosc, le baron étant retourné près des dames.
ENGLISH   Gossiping tales flew about, stories of adventures which amused them all for a week.
FRENCH   Ah! oui, mon vieux, je m\'amuse!  Toute la joie de l\'action, toute la gaieté de l\'existence sonnaient dans ses paroles.
FRENCH    -- Je le pense bien, mon oncle, murmura Denise, étourdie, et dont le désir d\'être au Bonheur des Dames grandissait, au milieu de toute cette passion.
FRENCH   C\'était Geneviève qui venait de se réveiller et qui tapait avec un bâton, laissé près d\'elle.
FRENCH   Robineau: tous trois causaient depuis un quart d\'heure.
FRENCH   Ainsi, depuis son entrée au Bonheur des Dames, elle était surtout blessée par le sort précaire des commis; les renvois brusques la soulevaient, elle les trouvait maladroits et iniques, nuisibles à tous, autant à la maison qu\'au personnel.
ENGLISH   We shall be all by ourselves.
ENGLISH    \"What\'s the matter?\" asked Denise, anxiously.
FRENCH    If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy.
ENGLISH   I\'ve married off the eldest, and his wife has sent him for some purchases.\"  Mouret continued looking at the three of them.
ENGLISH   Ah! Robineau thought of showing fight, did he! Mouret had become serious, though he affected a certain scorn, and avoided coming to a decision, as if it were matter of no importance.
FRENCH   C\'étaient des mots blessants, des inventions cruelles, une mise à l\'écart qui la frappait au coeur, dans son besoin de tendresse.
FRENCH   Et les paroles, rares encore, s\'étouffaient dans les bouches pleines.
ENGLISH   He lost his breath with rapture, feeling the while a kind of continuous caress from all his customers.
FRENCH   Enfin, je ne puis te prendre comme je te l\'offrais, ma pauvre fille.
ENGLISH   However Denise refused to return to Joinville with Pauline and Baugé.
ENGLISH   And he had penetrated still further into the heart of woman, and had just planned the system of \"returns\", a masterpiece of Jesuitical seduction.
ENGLISH   Then there was feverish jostling and crushing around the shelves and baskets where articles at reduced prices, lace at two sous, ribbon at five, garters at three the pair, gloves, petticoats, cravats, cotton socks, and stockings, were quickly disappearing, as if swallowed up by the voracious crowd.
FRENCH   De l\'enclos de planches longeant et embarrassant les trois rues, sortait un branle d\'activité fiévreuse.
FRENCH    Le caissier crut devoir se défendre, appela en témoignage le garçon qui avait fait le paquet.
FRENCH   Et il crut revoir le profil modeste de la jeune fille, qu\'il avait aperçue en traversant l\'antichambre.
ENGLISH   Whilst he was complimenting her and walking beside her, like a gallant host, she became deeply absorbed in thought, wondering how she could convict him of his treason.
FRENCH    Elle se débattait, maintenant.
FRENCH   Ça remonte, on a fait près de cent mille francs, hier.
FRENCH   Sa femme et sa fille restaient les regards à terre, en personnes soumises qui ne se permettaient jamais d\'intervenir.
ENGLISH   \"But they have the same opposite at five francs.\"  A slight contraction passed over Baudu\'s face.
FRENCH    -- Vous savez, nous irons toutes...
FRENCH   -- Vous savez que ces messieurs ont réclamé, dit la lingère délicate, et que la direction a promis...
FRENCH   Quand il se sentait guetté par elle, il rougissait, détournait la tête, comme s\'il eût redouté que la jeune fille ne le vendît à sa cousine Geneviève, bien qu\'il n\'y eût plus aucuns rapports entre les Baudu et leur nièce, depuis l\'entrée de celle-ci au Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH    Tous parlaient à la fois, s\'indignaient, plaisantaient.
ENGLISH   That day, however, just as they were indulging in a loving kiss in a corner of the passage they were surprised by Denise, who was also going up to lunch.
FRENCH   C\'était cette débâcle de marchandises qu\'il s\'agissait de lancer aux quatre coins de Paris.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! dit Mme Marty, vous regardez des cravates et des voilettes pareilles aux miennes.
FRENCH    -- Mais, madame, la souplesse est la qualité de cette soie.
FRENCH    Alors, Gaujean, le fabricant de soie, intervint.
FRENCH    Et, le soir, lorsque Denise monta se coucher, elle s\'appuyait aux cloisons de l\'étroit corridor, sous le zinc de la toiture.
FRENCH    -- Vous désirez quelque chose, monsieur Jouve? cria Mouret.
ENGLISH    \"Very good, I believe you,\" he murmured.
ENGLISH   But when she had once more donned this poor garment a painful emotion choked her; the sobs which she had kept back all day suddenly found vent in a flood of hot tears.
FRENCH   Rattachez ma robe, maman verrait mes épaules.
ENGLISH   When he passed behind Madame de Boves, surprised to see her with her arms plunged in such a heap of lace he cast a quick glance at her feverish hands.
FRENCH   N\'importe! ils ne m\'aplatiront peut-être pas comme une feuille de papier.
ENGLISH   It was surely through coming up too quickly.
FRENCH    Le lendemain, aux confections, Clara Prunaire essaya d\'être désagréable à Denise.
FRENCH   Mais, au nom du marchand de parapluies, Mouret s\'emporta.
ENGLISH   For her part Denise was choking with tears.
FRENCH   Mais le garçon de service lui dit que le directeur était avec M.
FRENCH    -- Non, monsieur, répondit-elle, embarrassée.
FRENCH   Mouret a beau dire, elle a les plus jolis dessins, des dessins qu\'on ne voit nulle part.
ENGLISH   She had a vague sensation of her power from the flattery with which she was surrounded.
FRENCH   Lorsque Denise passa près de lui, il l\'arrêta, en disant:  -- C\'est moi que vous cherchez?  Elle devint très rouge.
FRENCH    Pas un mensonge raisonnable ne lui venait aux lèvres.
FRENCH   D\'abord, plaisanté par Clara, il avait découché; puis, cédant à la folie de désir des garçons sournois et chastes, devenu le chien obéissant de cette fille, il n\'était pas rentré un lundi, il avait simplement écrit à son patron une lettre d\'adieu, faite avec des phrases soignées d\'homme qui se suicide.
FRENCH   Tous lui souriaient, il ne se passait point de semaine sans qu\'elle entrât au Bonheur, toujours seule.
ENGLISH   That\'s what appeared to decide him.\"  They were speaking of Mouret, who, the year before, had suddenly taken such a liking to Bouthemont that he had admitted him to share his pleasures; and had even introduced him to Henriette, glad to have an agreeable fellow always at hand to enliven an acquaintanceship of which he was getting tired.
FRENCH   À droite et à gauche, des pièces de drap dressaient des colonnes sombres, qui reculaient encore ce lointain de tabernacle.
ENGLISH   I feel much better since the morning.\"  In his turn he had turned pale on hearing this quiet refusal.
ENGLISH   We are going to venture our last stake.
ENGLISH   The countess, after wandering through all the departments with her daughter, without buying anything, had just stranded in the lace department in a rage of unsated desire.
FRENCH   Mme Aurélie la pria durement de veiller à la vente.
FRENCH    -- Ça, je vous approuve, reprit le baron.
ENGLISH   Clara was not duped by this manœuvre, but Marguerite threw her the garments at a quicker rate, in order to take up her attention and close her mouth.
FRENCH   Mouret avait calculé juste: toutes les ménagères, une troupe serrée de petites-bourgeoises et de femmes en bonnet, donnaient assaut aux occasions, aux soldes et aux coupons, étalés jusque dans la rue.
FRENCH   C\'était toujours cela, elle ne s\'en irait pas les mains vides, elle se ferait une amie de la petite fille de son concierge.
FRENCH   La machine ronflait toujours, encore en activité, lâchant sa vapeur dans un dernier grondement, pendant que les vendeurs repliaient les étoffes et que les caissiers comptaient la recette.
FRENCH   Ce serait trop lâche, n\'est-ce pas?  Colomban, soulagé, s\'était assis sur des pièces de molleton.
ENGLISH   The necessity for the separation caused her tears to flow; but, with her great courage, she repeated that it was necessary, that she would have no rest or happiness if she acted in any other way.
FRENCH   Un moment, il avait rêvé de littérature, et il lui était resté de sa fréquentation avec des poètes une désespérance universelle.
FRENCH    Comme Hutin et Favier s\'attardaient, ils virent descendre Denise.
ENGLISH    Meanwhile, Denise had returned to Madame Bourdelais.
ENGLISH   \"Cholet handkerchiefs, eh?\"  \"Yes, like this one,\" he replied, showing a handkerchief in his parcel.
FRENCH   Au delà, Paris s\'étendait, mais un Paris rapetissé, mangé par le monstre: les maisons, d\'une humilité de chaumières dans le voisinage, s\'éparpillaient ensuite en une poussière de cheminées indistinctes; les monuments semblaient fondre, à gauche deux traits pour Notre-Dame, à droite un accent circonflexe pour les Invalides, au fond le Panthéon, honteux et perdu, moins gros qu\'une lentille.
FRENCH    Et, sans ajouter une parole, il continua sa promenade.
ENGLISH   It\'s very certain the husband and wife won\'t come across each other to-day.\"  Both then began talking of the Rambouillet excursion.
FRENCH   Merci mille fois, monsieur.
ENGLISH   Heavens! what tortures! There were families weeping, old men thrown into the street, all the poignant dramas of ruin! And she could save nobody; and even felt that it was right, that all this compost of misery was necessary for the health of the Paris of the future.
ENGLISH   I select you; it\'s quite natural.
ENGLISH   \"Just help me, mademoiselle.\"  Then Denise, approaching, had to give her the mantle.
FRENCH    -- Dépêchez-vous, c\'est insupportable! cria Hutin à Favier, qui revenait de conduire sa cliente à une caisse.
FRENCH   Debout devant un casier de minces cravates noires, il semblait réfléchir profondément.
ENGLISH   When their father had died, carried off by the same fever which a month previously had killed their mother, their uncle Baudu, in the emotion born of this double bereavement, had certainly written to Denise, assuring her that there would always be a place for her in his house whenever she might like to try fortune in Paris.
ENGLISH   The poor girl\'s bosom was as hollow as a child\'s.
FRENCH   Il ne restait donc qu\'à la placer elle-même.
FRENCH   Je vous adresse mes adieux, ma chère.
ENGLISH   Under dark folds of hair, she had big fixed eyes, a severe mouth, and broad and rather drooping cheeks; and in the majesty of her position as manageress her face seemed to swell with pride like the puffy countenance of a Cæsar.
FRENCH   Le premier, il venait d\'acheter dans le Levant, à des conditions excellentes, une collection de tapis anciens et de tapis neufs, de ces tapis rares que, seuls, les marchands de curiosités vendaient jusque-là, très cher; et il allait en inonder le marché, il les cédait presque à prix coûtant, en tirait simplement un décor splendide, qui devait attirer chez lui la haute clientèle de l\'art.
FRENCH   Mais, pour le moment, l\'attention refluait vers le Bonheur, enfiévrée des histoires qui couraient, occupée jusqu\'à l\'obsession de ces bazars dont l\'importance prenait une si large place dans la vie publique.
FRENCH   Les travaux s\'achevaient, on avait débarrassé la façade des échafaudages, tout un pan du colossal édifice apparaissait, avec ses murs blancs, troués de larges vitrines claires.
ENGLISH   He had been making a night of it, and his tightly buttoned overcoat concealed a dress suit and white tie.
ENGLISH   Really, a man must be badly constituted, have his brain and limbs out of order, to refuse to work in an age of such vast undertakings, when the entire century was pressing forward with giant strides.
FRENCH   Elle désespérait de se caser avant mars, lorsque, un soir de janvier, Deloche, qui la guettait sous une porte, lui donna un conseil.
ENGLISH    In the silk department, Robineau\'s return had provoked quite a revolution.
FRENCH    Une femme maigre entra, laide, ravagée de petite vérole, mise avec une élégance compliquée.
FRENCH   Être tous les deux chez elle, dans son parfum aimé, l\'avoir là prête à les convaincre d\'un sourire, lui semblait une certitude de succès.
ENGLISH   Big, and strong as an ox, with a long Flemish face, in which his expressionless eyes twinkled with infantile puerility, Baugé was the younger son of a grocer of Dunkerque and had come to Paris, almost driven from home by his father and brother, who thought him a fearful dunce.
ENGLISH   For an instant, Deloche would stand talking, leaning one shoulder against the cistern in the continual abandonment of his long body, bent by fatigue.
FRENCH    Il jeta un coup d\'oeil vers le salon, il baissa la voix.
ENGLISH   Nevertheless he desired to be just.
ENGLISH   \"Why not a hundred thousand at once? It\'s this immense sum of money that makes me so indignant.
FRENCH   D\'abord, ils furent séduits par un arrangement compliqué: en haut, des parapluies, posés obliquement, semblaient mettre un toit de cabane rustique; dessous, des bas de soie, pendus à des tringles, montraient des profils arrondis de mollets, les uns semés de bouquets de roses, les autres de toutes nuances, les noirs à jour, les rouges à coins brodés, les chairs dont le grain satiné avait la douceur d\'une peau de blonde; enfin, sur le drap de l\'étagère, des gants étaient jetés symétriquement, avec leurs doigts allongés, leur paume étroite de vierge byzantine, cette grâce raidie et comme adolescente des chiffons de femme qui n\'ont pas été portés.
FRENCH   Les épaules vont à la perfection...
FRENCH   Cette dernière, suivie de sa fille Valentine, était depuis deux heures emportée à travers les magasins, par une de ces crises de dépense, dont elle sortait brisée et confuse.
FRENCH    -- Ah! dit-il simplement.
ENGLISH    \"There\'s a time for everything,\" rejoined Baudu, who sat before a piece of cold veal, carving it with a master\'s skill and prudence, calculating the weight of each thin slice to within a quarter of an ounce.
FRENCH   Celui-ci sentit la caresse amoureuse de ce coup d\'oeil, le triomphe de la femme heureuse de sa beauté et de son art.
ENGLISH   Ah! if he heard any more unkind remarks about her, he would soon close the mouths of the jealous ones! But Pauline sent him away with a good-natured shrug of the shoulders.
ENGLISH   Everybody in the department--from the unpaid probationer, longing to become a salesman, to the first salesman who coveted the situation of manager--had but one fixed idea, and that was to dislodge the comrade above them, to ascend another rung of the ladder, by knocking him over if necessary; and this battle of appetites, this constant hurtling, even contributed to the better working of the machine, inspiriting the sales and fanning the flame of success which was astonishing Paris.
ENGLISH   In one of those fits of brusque frankness with which he sometimes overwhelmed his familiars, he declared that he was at heart a greater Jew than all the Jews in the world; he took, said he, after his father, whom he resembled physically and morally, a fellow who knew the value of money; and, if his mother had given him that dash of nervous fantasy which he displayed, it was, perhaps, the principal element of his luck, for he felt that his ability to dare everything was an invincible force.
FRENCH   Lui, fiévreux, traversait les trois salles du service, questionnait Levasseur, le chef, sur le poids du courrier: quatre-vingts livres, quatre-vingt-dix parfois, le lundi cent.
ENGLISH   She quickly drew him close to the grating, in a dark corner.
ENGLISH   Was she getting old then that she should be cast aside for the first-comer? The glass reflected the entire department with all its commotion, but she only beheld her own pale face; she did not hear Clara behind her, relating to Marguerite a story of Madame Frédéric\'s mysterious goings-on, the manner in which she went out of her way night and morning so as to pass through the Passage Choiseul, and thus make people believe that she lived over the water.
FRENCH    Mouret eut d\'abord un sourire discret.
FRENCH   À voir les acheteuses qui se retiraient, on aurait dit en l\'air, au bout des fils invisibles, un vol d\'énormes bulles de savon, reflétant l\'incendie des ombrelles.
FRENCH    -- Ah! non, c\'est le père Jouve, murmura-t-elle d\'un air rassuré.
FRENCH   Puis, elle se leva, ouvrit le piano, joua doucement avec un seul doigt Le Roi Dagobert, pour égayer la situation sans doute.
FRENCH   On les revit de nouveau dans tous les rayons.
ENGLISH   She felt herself lost, so little in this monstrous place, this machine which was still at rest, and trembled with fear lest she should be caught in the movement with which the walls already began to quiver.
ENGLISH    She now at times had long friendly talks with Mouret.
FRENCH   Pendant qu\'il regardait les caissiers penchés sur leurs registres, additionnant les longues colonnes de chiffres, pendant qu\'il écoutait le petit bruit de l\'or, tombant de leurs doigts dans les sébiles de cuivre, il voyait déjà le Bonheur des Dames grandir démesurément, élargir son hall, prolonger ses galeries jusqu\'à la rue du Dix-Décembre.
FRENCH   Puis, ses regards allèrent vers son père.
ENGLISH   Pull yourself together a bit, don\'t let yourself be crushed in this way.
FRENCH   Il faut voir leur fameux Paris-Bonheur.
ENGLISH   Since I have had to fight against the process-servers, I know that the villain has been buying up my bills in the hope of playing me some villainous trick.
FRENCH   À cette heure, la grande galerie centrale allait de bout en bout, ouvrait sur la rue du Dix-Décembre et sur la rue Neuve- Saint-Augustin; tandis que, à droite et à gauche, pareilles aux bas-côtés d\'une église, la galerie Monsigny et la galerie Michodière, plus étroites, filaient elles aussi le long des deux rues, sans une interruption.
FRENCH    Ils levèrent la tête, se retournèrent.
FRENCH    Denise allait rentrer au Bonheur des Dames.
ENGLISH   She roughly sent him back to his department, saying that she didn\'t want any one to come and distract her young ladies\' attention from their work.
ENGLISH   The voices grew louder still, you saw nothing but waving arms continually emptying the shelves and throwing the goods down; and it was impossible to get along for the tide of the bales and packages on the floor rose as high as the counters.
FRENCH   Puis, il avait pénétré plus avant encore dans le coeur de la femme, il venait d\'imaginer «les rendus», un chef d\'oeuvre de séduction jésuitique.
ENGLISH    But the greatest power of all was the advertising.
FRENCH   Ce pauvre garçon de tout à l\'heure est aussi peu coupable que moi.
ENGLISH   When counter-jumpers start selling soap and goloshes, they are quite capable of dealing in fried potatoes.
FRENCH   Elle ne se couchait jamais avant minuit.
ENGLISH    \"Yes,\" murmured Madame Desforges, in a jealous voice, \"it\'s a good idea.\"  But, just as they were moving away, they heard two salesmen joking about these violets.
FRENCH   Mais Robineau, nerveux et tourmenté, l\'interrompait avec impatience: il connaissait la crise que les nouveautés traversaient, il citait une spécialité de soie tuée déjà par le voisinage du Bonheur.
ENGLISH   But in the auxiliary following Denise, with a yellow number on her shoulder, and a coarse, cadaverous, servant\'s-looking face, Henriette had recognised Mademoiselle de Fontenailles, and relieved herself by saying to Madame Guibal, in an angry voice:  \"Just see what he\'s doing with that unfortunate girl.
FRENCH   Denise affectait de plaisanter, tout en apportant des arguments solides: les intermédiaires disparaissaient, agents de fabrique, représentants, commissionnaires, ce qui entrait pour beaucoup dans le bon marché; du reste, les fabricants ne pouvaient même plus vivre sans les grands magasins, car dès qu\'un d\'entre eux perdait leur clientèle, la faillite devenait fatale; enfin, il y avait là une évolution naturelle du commerce, on n\'empêcherait pas les choses d\'aller comme elles devaient aller, quand tout le monde y travaillait, bon gré, mal gré.
ENGLISH   A messenger having shown her to the top of the house, and handed her over to Madame Cabin, who cleaned and looked after the rooms, this person installed her in No.
FRENCH    -- Que cherchez-vous donc, mademoiselle? demanda-t-il enfin.
FRENCH   Soudain, la lingère eut un geste de fuite: elle venait d\'apercevoir la cravate blanche d\'un inspecteur, qui sortait des châles.
FRENCH   Sous l\'écroulement de ces blancheurs, dans l\'apparent désordre des tissus, tombés comme au hasard des cases éventrées, il y avait une phrase harmonique, le blanc suivi et développé dans tous ses tons, qui naissait, grandissait, s\'épanouissait, avec l\'orchestration compliquée d\'une fugue de maître, dont le développement continu emporte les âmes d\'un vol sans cesse élargi.
ENGLISH   But this excited them too much, they came back careless, their minds bent on other things than business; and so the managers had decided that they should not go out, but pay an extra three halfpence for a cup of coffee, if they wanted one.
ENGLISH   And he was quite confused when he heard the other ask him:  \"Isn\'t it true, sir, that work leads to everything?\"  \"Work and thrift,\" replied he, with a slight shiver of his whole body.
FRENCH   Sous les crises de sa sensibilité, il y avait une raison sans cesse agissante, toute une bravoure d\'être faible et seul, s\'obstinant gaiement au devoir qu\'elle s\'imposait.
FRENCH   C\'était au rayon des tapis, celle-ci venait enfin de monter rendre tout un achat de portières d\'Orient, fait par elle depuis cinq jours; et elle causait, debout devant le vendeur, un grand gaillard, dont les bras de lutteur remuaient, du matin au soir, des charges à tuer un boeuf.
ENGLISH   One old gentleman had gone to sleep over the _Moniteur_.
FRENCH   Elle se torturait l\'esprit.
ENGLISH   Since Henriette had quitted the drawing-room, and he had known Denise to be there in jealous hands, he had experienced a growing anxiety, a nervous torment, which made him listen from time to time, as if suddenly startled by a distant sound of weeping.
FRENCH   Le portrait de Mme Hédouin souriait toujours, de ses lèvres peintes, Mouret était tombé assis sur le bureau, dans le million, qu\'il ne voyait plus.
ENGLISH   \"I don\'t care!\" he resumed, \"I\'ve stuck her for two hundred and ninety-three francs.
ENGLISH   The creditors had preferred to come to an understanding in presence of such a long series of misfortunes.
FRENCH   On étouffait maintenant, on fit ouvrir les fenêtres.
FRENCH    Elle préférait se désintéresser.
ENGLISH   There was an incessant noise from the grinding of the windlasses hoisting up the free-stone, the abrupt unloading of iron bars, the clamour of the army of workmen, accompanied by the noise of picks and hammers.
ENGLISH   To drive away the odour of the food--the warm steam which rose from the five hundred plates--they had opened the windows, whose lowered blinds were scorching in the heavy August sun.
FRENCH   Elle le renvoya rudement à son rayon, elle n\'avait pas besoin qu\'on vînt distraire ces demoiselles.
ENGLISH    And thereupon she introduced her lover, and Denise felt at her ease at once, he seemed such a nice fellow.
ENGLISH   The enormous losses were covered by insurances and people had already begun to shrug their shoulders, saying what a splendid advertisement it was.
FRENCH   Elle avait eu un léger sursaut, mais elle s\'était domptée, et elle gardait un beau calme, les joues pâles.
FRENCH    -- Toi aussi! dit en riant Mme Desforges à son amie de pension.
FRENCH   Certes, il ne lui refusait rien, elle était sûre qu\'il accorderait tous les dédommagements raisonnables.
FRENCH   Les soixante-dix mille francs allaient soutenir la maison pendant quelque temps encore.
FRENCH   Elle eut beau se présenter dans les magasins, à la place Clichy, au Bon Marché, au Louvre: la morte-saison arrêtait partout les affaires, on la renvoyait à l\'automne, plus de cinq mille employés de commerce, congédiés comme elle, battaient le pavé, sans place.
FRENCH    *** END: FULL LICENSE ***.
FRENCH   Jean dédaignait ces parties; il se montrait de loin en loin, les soirs de semaine, puis disparaissait, en prétextant d\'autres visites; il ne demandait plus d\'argent, mais il arrivait avec des airs si mélancoliques, que sa soeur, inquiète, avait toujours pour lui une pièce de cent sous de côté.
FRENCH    -- J\'ai été très bon pour vous, mademoiselle, continua-t-il, en faisant un nouvel effort.
FRENCH   Les marchands de meubles, plus calmes, affectaient de plaisanter ces calicots qui se mêlaient de vendre des tables et des armoires; mais des clientes les quittaient déjà, le succès du rayon s\'annonçait formidable.
ENGLISH   Yet, beneath this coldness, so unusual with him, Mouret hid a frightful attack of indecision and suffering.
FRENCH   Oui, c\'est imbécile, je souffre comme un enfant!  Des larmes mouillèrent ses yeux.
FRENCH   Et Pépé, également blond, d\'un blond d\'enfance, se serrait davantage contre elle, comme pris d\'un besoin inquiet de caresses, troublé et ravi par les belles dames de la vitrine.
FRENCH    -- Maintenant, qu\'allons-nous faire? demanda Baugé, lorsque le café fut servi.
ENGLISH   Now and again there passed an inspector with a ceremonious air, very stiff in his white choker.
ENGLISH   Counter-jumper, my boy!\"  Mouret raised his head, again slapped his friend on the knee, and repeated, with the sterling gaiety of a man who did not blush for the trade by which he was making his fortune:  \"Counter-jumper, and no mistake! You remember, no doubt, I didn\'t nibble much at their baits, although at heart I never thought myself a bigger fool than the others.
ENGLISH   Then, as Madame de Boves looked at her with a smile, she blushed.
ENGLISH   It was a time of black misery--misery in a silk dress.
ENGLISH   In the show cases, and on the crystal tablets of the shelves, were ranged pots of pomade and paste, boxes of powder and paint, phials of oil and toilet vinegar; whilst the fine brushes, combs, scissors, and smelling-bottles occupied a special place.
FRENCH   Mme Marty s\'était aussi abandonnée.
FRENCH   Quant à Bourdoncle, il oubliait qu\'il était de l\'établissement, il félicitait aussi son patron, afin de lui faire oublier ses doutes et ses préoccupations inquiètes du matin.
FRENCH    -- Je ne peux guère les aimer, ma cousine, répondit Geneviève.
FRENCH    -- Tu sais, ce sont des chemises à coulisse, dit Jean, que ce déshabillé, cette crue de chiffons où il enfonçait, ravissait d\'aise.
FRENCH    -- Comment! dit Mme de Boves, M.
ENGLISH   \"Really now, I am quite furious with myself! I could slap my face!\" He had taken her hands, and was kissing them and inundating them with tears.
ENGLISH   \"If she comes here I\'ll let her in for something extensive; I want a five-franc piece!\"  In the glove department there was quite a row of ladies seated before the narrow counter covered with green velvet and edged with nickel silver; and before them the smiling shopmen were heaping up flat boxes of a bright pink, taken out of the counter itself, and resembling the ticketed drawers of a secrétaire.
FRENCH   Mais je vous jure que, moi vivant, il n\'en aura pas une pierre.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, elle dévorait, d\'une gourmandise affamée de fille mal nourrie au magasin, se donnant dehors une indigestion des choses qu\'elle aimait; c\'était son vice, tout son argent passait là, en gâteaux, en crudités, en petits plats dégustés lestement aux heures libres.
FRENCH   Jamais je n\'ai rien vu de plus riche.
FRENCH    Il se confessa en effet, il raconta ses débuts, il ne cacha même pas la crise financière qu\'il traversait, au milieu de son triomphe.
FRENCH   Vous pouvez parler...
FRENCH   Le soleil venait de se coucher derrière les arbres du jardin, le jour tombait, une ombre fine noyait peu à peu la vaste pièce.
FRENCH    Ceux qui avaient des morceaux de carcasse se fâchaient.
FRENCH   Ils peuvent afficher un franc, deux francs meilleur marché que nous.
ENGLISH   And Denise sat there for nearly an hour, taking interest in what went on around her.
FRENCH   Bientôt le comptoir fut couvert d\'une fortune.
ENGLISH   Thus, near the reading-room, they once more came across Madame Bourdelais and her three children.
FRENCH   On raconte qu\'il lui a procuré un petit travail, des noeuds de cravate.
ENGLISH    \"But I am quite at your service, ladies,\" said Mouret on entering, a smile on his lips.
ENGLISH   Besides that, he made a fine display, piling huge bales of the famous silk in his windows and displaying immense white tickets, on which the price, five francs and a half per mêtre, appeared in gigantic figures.
FRENCH   Mouret pour une minute.
ENGLISH   You know my ideas; I should consider it wrong if I passed this family trust over to my children in a diminished state; and that\'s why I\'ve always postponed your marriage with Geneviève.
FRENCH   Le brouhaha de la foule bourdonnait dans sa tête, elle se sentait chanceler, les muscles meurtris d\'avoir soulevé des brassées de vêtements, besogne de manoeuvre qu\'elle n\'avait jamais faite.
ENGLISH   You are really not reasonable, Jean.
FRENCH    -- Non, monsieur, rien encore, affirmait l\'inspecteur.
ENGLISH    \"Very well, I believe,\" replied Madame Marty, scared by this abrupt question, which fell ill-naturedly amidst her rage for spending.
FRENCH   Quand ils approchèrent, elle se réfugia au fond du salon des dentelles, d\'où le brusque appel d\'une voix la fit aussitôt ressortir, pour gagner la porte de communication en courant.
ENGLISH   The father was consulted at every turn so that it seemed they would never finish.
ENGLISH   And each took one of these bottles in his empty hand as he passed, and then, completely laden, made for his table with a serious air, careful not to spill anything.
FRENCH   Celui-ci, redevenu muet, regardait les meubles, semblait chercher au plafond.
ENGLISH   Madame de Boves was finishing the description of an evening-dress; a mauve silk tunic, draped and caught up by bows of lace; the bodice cut very low, with similar bows of lace on the shoulders.
FRENCH   Et, à terre, s\'entassaient seize millions de marchandises, une mer montante qui avait fini par submerger les tables et les comptoirs.
FRENCH   Il n\'y avait plus qu\'eux, ils demeuraient face à face, dans la maison vidée lentement par la ruine; et la mort de leur fille creusait davantage les coins de ténèbres, était comme le craquement suprême qui allait faire se rompre les vieilles poutres mangées d\'humidité.
FRENCH   Vous les roulerez, je vous en réponds!...
FRENCH   Puis, des ballots parurent, tournant sur eux-mêmes comme des cailloux roulés.
FRENCH   Après avoir lu la lettre, elle se serra contre Denise, la prit à la taille, pour lui murmurer doucement:  -- Ma chère, si vous voulez que je sois franche, je croyais que c\'était fait...
FRENCH   Lorsque les autres vendeuses, chez lui, n\'avaient qu\'une éducation de frottement, le vernis qui s\'écaille des filles déclassées, elle, sans élégances fausses, gardait sa grâce, la saveur de son origine.
FRENCH    Des mois se passèrent.
FRENCH   On est plus à l\'aise.
FRENCH   Elle est avec les brigands, parole d\'honneur!  L\'oncle, jusque-là, avait paru ne pas voir Denise.
FRENCH   De sa caisse, située près de la porte, il apercevait celle de son fils, qui se trouvait au rayon de la ganterie.
FRENCH   Ça marche, n\'est-ce pas? Je crois que la journée sera magnifique.
FRENCH   Quinze jours à l\'avance, le rayon ne causa que de la partie: on regardait le ciel attiédi par le soleil de mai, on occupait déjà chaque heure de la journée, on se promettait tous les plaisirs, des ânes, du lait, du pain bis.
ENGLISH   But the factory-like glow which pervaded the house came above all from the sales, the crush at the counters, which could be divined behind the walls.
FRENCH   Et aujourd\'hui, il veut s\'en aller avec une autre! Oh! mon Dieu! mon coeur se fend.
FRENCH    -- Tirez donc les stores! criait Bouthemont, très occupé à surveiller la besogne.
ENGLISH    Then the two friends went on conversing; and at last Denise in a sudden impulse exclaimed: \"But when a man loves a girl he ought to marry her.
ENGLISH   There are some articles to be changed, and others to be bought.
FRENCH   Et il y eut encore là une explosion de bavardages.
FRENCH   Oh! rien de drôle, Robineau est trop bête là- dessus...
ENGLISH   And that was what Henriette called a bargain! Two hundred francs for a plain ivory mount, with a monogram! And that for a mere piece of Chantilly, over which she had perhaps saved five francs.
FRENCH   Dans le pâté énorme, il y avait encore, sur cette dernière voie, un vaste terrain en bordure, qu\'il ne possédait point; et cela suffisait à gâter son triomphe, il était torturé par le besoin de compléter sa conquête, de dresser, là, comme apothéose, une façade monumentale.
FRENCH   Le rayon devenait complice, les vendeuses s\'agitaient davantage, les dos de Lhomme et de Joseph se renflaient, comme sourds.
ENGLISH   She was well aware that Mouret, after Denise\'s rejection, had fallen back on that tall, red-haired girl, with the horse\'s head: and he had done this doubtless by calculation; for he maintained her in the department, loading her with presents.
FRENCH   Parfois, on comptait là une cinquantaine de fillettes, autant de garçons, tout un pensionnat turbulent, lâché dans les désirs de la coquetterie naissante.
FRENCH    -- Enfin, mon vieux, tout calicot qui débute est aujourd\'hui dans la peau d\'un millionnaire.
ENGLISH   But, like a fellow well acquainted with every trick of the old style of trade, he retained his sedateness, his good-natured air, with just a touch of cunning about his lips.
ENGLISH   To hear him, there was no doubt about his eventual triumph; he would certainly swallow up the monster.
ENGLISH   And in this general amiability, the only things that hurt her were Deloche\'s singularly melancholy glances and Pauline\'s inexplicable smiles.
FRENCH    Et elle répéta, en se hasardant à lever les yeux sur Mouret, sur ce prétendu chef de rayon qu\'elle rencontrait toujours, et dont la présence la troublait:  -- Je n\'en ai pas l\'air, mais je suis très solide.
ENGLISH   Twenty similar rooms ran along the yellow-painted convent-like corridor; and, of the thirty-five young ladies in the house, the twenty who had no relations in Paris slept there, whilst the remaining fifteen lodged outside, a few with borrowed aunts and cousins.
FRENCH   Tout payé, l\'oncle allait simplement se trouver à la rue.
FRENCH    Elle se pencha pour ajouter:  -- Vous n\'avez pas reconnu M.
FRENCH   La face bouffie de sa femme, ce masque blême, ravagé par la peur, l\'épouvantait.
ENGLISH   In short, when they liked to conduct themselves well, they could; for they were not, like the work-girls of Paris, obliged to board and lodge themselves; they had bed and board given them, their existence, though an extremely hard one, no doubt, was at all events provided for.
ENGLISH   The situation becomes worse every day, but perhaps by making a supreme effort.--In short, I thought it right to warn you.
FRENCH   C\'était le moment où les vendeurs s\'installaient dans leurs rayons, que les garçons avaient balayés et époussetés dès cinq heures.
ENGLISH   If she had lived things would be different.
ENGLISH   Dear me! how I\'ve played in the hollow road, on the left, coming down from the mill!\"  Their voices died away, they remained with their eyes fixed, lost on the sunny lake of the glass work.
ENGLISH   You are aware that Gaujean has positively declared war against me.
ENGLISH   Beneath her she now had the departments on the ground-floor, with the press of customers through which she had just passed.
ENGLISH   Pépé was playing at her feet, whilst Jean had resumed his post of observation on the threshold.
ENGLISH   Well! some fine things go on in your place!\"  \"Oh!\" replied Mouret, smiling, \"these ladies are not in my house, they are at home here.\"  Then, still continuing his gossip, he carried his old comrade along to the threshold of the reading-room, opposite the grand central gallery, whose successive halls spread out below them.
ENGLISH   It\'s putrid.\"  They were all speaking at once, some complaining and some joking.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! voilà le patron qui rit maintenant! reprit Favier étonné, comme le groupe passait de nouveau devant la porte.
FRENCH   Il regardait ce torrent tomber chez lui, il songeait qu\'il était un des maîtres de la fortune publique, qu\'il tenait dans ses mains le sort de la fabrication française, et qu\'il ne pouvait acheter le baiser d\'une de ses vendeuses.
FRENCH    Ce fut vers les derniers jours de septembre que la jeune fille connut la misère noire.
FRENCH    Du reste, la situation allait empirer encore.
FRENCH   Pourtant, Denise devait lui donner congé, et elle tremblait, car elle lui gardait une vive reconnaissance.
ENGLISH   These two, still continuing their inspection, were now traversing the hall and stopped to ask Robineau for an explanation respecting a stock of velvets, the boxes of which were encumbering a table.
ENGLISH    In the evening, as Denise was returning from dinner, a messenger called her: \"You are wanted at the director\'s office, mademoiselle.\"  She had forgotten the order which Mouret had given her in the morning, to go to his office when the sale was over.
ENGLISH   But from that moment Madame Desforges, with the delicate scent of a jealous woman, had no further doubt.
ENGLISH    But Mouret shrugged his shoulders with an air of overwhelming disdain.
FRENCH    Cependant, Mouret, toujours debout devant le salon de lecture, en compagnie de Vallagnosc, respirait cette odeur, s\'en grisait, en répétant:  -- Elles sont chez elles, j\'en connais qui passent la journée ici, à manger des gâteaux et à écrire leur correspondance...
ENGLISH   Yet he was quite willing to accept the blame, if it would get the latter out of a scrape.
ENGLISH    \"Thank heaven!\" said the draper in conclusion, \"if the father drinks and runs after women, the son at all events has learnt the value of money here.\"  Whilst he was thus speaking Denise began to examine Geneviève and Colomban.
FRENCH    -- Vous pouvez entrer, dit le commis.
FRENCH    -- Oui, j\'ai à causer avec vous...
FRENCH    -- Tiens-toi donc tranquille!...
FRENCH   Comme les deux jeunes filles quittaient le jardin du restaurant, une voix timide murmura dans l\'ombre:  -- Bonsoir, mesdemoiselles.
ENGLISH   Mouret and Bourdoncle had entered the gallery; and as the former again stopped in front of the young woman, without, however, speaking to her, Madame Desforges and Madame Guibal passed by.
FRENCH    -- D\'abord, un transparent de soie mauve, et puis, là-dessus, des volants de vieil Alençon, haut de trente centimètres...
FRENCH   De loin en loin, entraient des clientes: une dame parut, puis deux autres.
FRENCH   Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
ENGLISH   But just look at him! Isn\'t he comical, trying to magnetize her with his eyes? The old-fashioned gallantry, my dear fellow! I adore that man, and if I marry his daughter, he may safely say it\'s for his sake!\"  Mouret laughed, greatly amused.
FRENCH   Je t\'assure, mon ami, que j\'ai été encore très raisonnable; car il y avait une grande pointe de cinq cents francs, oh! merveilleuse!  -- Pourquoi ne l\'avez-vous pas achetée? dit tranquillement Mme Guibal.
FRENCH   Derrière eux, l\'équipe suivait.
ENGLISH   This time the pretty lady was in deep mourning.
ENGLISH   Whilst waiting for another he resumed a conversation previously begun, by saying to Favier: \"So he wanted to fight you?\"  \"Yes, I was quietly drinking my glass of beer.
FRENCH   Elle l\'acheta, le vendeur qui l\'accompagnait laissa la chaise et tout le paquet des notes de débit, jointes aux marchandises.
FRENCH   Et, désormais, cette façade, devant laquelle on s\'écrasait, devenait la réclame vivante, avec son luxe bariolé et doré de bazar, ses vitrines larges à y exposer le poème entier des vêtements de la femme, ses enseignes prodiguées, peintes, gravées, taillées, depuis les plaques de marbre du rez- de-chaussée, jusqu\'aux feuilles de tôle arrondies en arc au-dessus des toits, déroulant l\'or de leurs banderoles, et où le nom de la maison se lisait en lettres couleur du temps, découpées sur le bleu de l\'air.
FRENCH   On cherche un médecin.
ENGLISH   Then came a bird\'s eye view of the buildings themselves, of exaggerated immensity, with the roofs of the covered galleries, the glazed courtyards in which the halls could be divined, all the infinitude of that lake of glass and zinc shining in the sun.
ENGLISH   Then she perceived that she was dressed in silk; and this uniform depressed her.
FRENCH    Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email business@pglaf.org.
ENGLISH   It was thus that Denise found herself installed near Lhomme the cashier and Joseph the messenger, both of whom were bending over large sheets of paper.
FRENCH   Toutes les malchances tombaient à la fois, car elle espérait rentrer dans ses dix-huit francs trente, en s\'adressant à Robineau, qui retrouverait peut-être l\'entrepreneuse des noeuds de cravate; mais Robineau, ayant obtenu un congé de deux semaines, n\'était pas revenu la veille, comme on l\'attendait.
ENGLISH   There was quite a struggle over one article, The Paradise Soap, a specialty of the house.
ENGLISH   \"And you, youngster, it\'s your fault, you get making him believe that we are going to have wonderful fun! Just try to be a little more reasonable.\"  She had given Jean four thousand francs, half of her savings, to enable him to set up housekeeping.
FRENCH    -- Oui, finit-elle par avouer faiblement.
ENGLISH   \"I sent him to attend to some matching so as to avoid any unpleasant occurrence.
ENGLISH   Really, it isn\'t possible?\"  \"But it is, though,\" replied Denise.
FRENCH    D\'abord, aux corsets, une petite émeute attroupait la foule.
FRENCH   En voilà un qu\'ils n\'auront jamais!...
FRENCH   Mais elle affecta la surprise.
FRENCH   Robineau est au réassortiment, dit-il.
FRENCH    Mouret écoutait, saisi par cette querelle, ne trouvant pas la phrase pour en finir.
ENGLISH   Almost at the same moment Monsieur de Boves and Paul de Vallagnosc came in.
FRENCH    -- Dame! répondit-il, je t\'attendais...
FRENCH   On se récria forcément sur le salon oriental.
ENGLISH   She kissed Pépé with a swelling heart, at the thought of their approaching separation.
FRENCH    L\'enquête de la direction était terminée, le bruit des fourchettes recommença.
ENGLISH    \"And yet if I liked----\" he said in an ardent voice, seizing her hands.
ENGLISH   Buried beneath a heap of petticoats, they were still buying.
ENGLISH   However the Paris Delight proved the great success; around it pressed one of those crowds whose feverish infatuation decrees a fashion in a day.
FRENCH   Justement, la cloche sonnait; et, troublée, encore frémissante, elle oublia Robineau, elle remonta au comptoir.
FRENCH   Depuis quelque temps, les plaintes des employés devenaient telles, que la direction affectait de descendre juger par elle-même la qualité de la nourriture.
FRENCH   Oui, je m\'entêtais, j\'espérais ramener la prospérité ancienne, je voulais te mettre les livres sous le nez, en disant:  «Tiens! l\'année où je suis entré, on a vendu tant de drap, et cette année-ci, l\'année où je sors, on en a vendu dix mille ou vingt mille francs de plus...» Enfin, tu comprends, un serment que je me suis fait, le désir bien naturel de me prouver que la maison n\'a pas perdu entre mes mains.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! le chantilly n\'est pas cher.
ENGLISH   We are not in a market.
FRENCH   Mouret nous a dit que vous ne pouviez vous en tirer.
ENGLISH   The latter, however, remained quite perturbed by the prospect of this unhoped-for sale which suddenly presented itself.
ENGLISH   On this occasion the gold and silver predominated, and he slowly walked upstairs carrying three enormous bags, which he clasped with his one arm against his breast, holding one of them with his chin in order to prevent it from slipping.
FRENCH   Ils ne se marcheront pas sur les pieds.
ENGLISH   \"He was on the pavement and slipped under the wheels of an omnibus.
FRENCH   Le Bon Marché a la rive gauche, le Louvre tient le centre; nous accaparons, au Bonheur, les quartiers riches de l\'ouest.
ENGLISH   The children had been brought up and fortune had seemed at hand, when suddenly this competition had arisen and ruined all their hopes.
ENGLISH   There was the sullen jealousy of the saleswomen towards the well-dressed customers, the ladies whose manners they tried to imitate, and there was a still stronger feeling on the part of the poorly-dressed customers, those of the lower middle-class, against the saleswomen, those girls arrayed in silk, from whom they would have liked to exact a servant\'s humility even in the serving of a half franc purchase.
FRENCH    -- Elle est donc veuve? demanda l\'autre.
ENGLISH   He\'s continually going outside to look at her.
ENGLISH   He often said that to make people do their best, and even to keep them fairly honest, it was first of all necessary to excite their selfish desires.
FRENCH    Des clientes arrivaient.
ENGLISH    \"Well! she makes me rather anxious.
FRENCH   Non, c\'est pour une crapule, un ami à elle qui nous a vus; et, tu comprends, si je ne lui donne pas les quinze francs, ce soir...
ENGLISH    \"I don\'t care a button for their rises!\" she resumed, still talking to the little saleswoman.
FRENCH    Mais il sentit la jeune fille confuse, il se hâta d\'ajouter:  -- On peut être honnête partout, et il y a même plus de mérite à l\'être, quand on n\'est pas riche.
FRENCH    -- Quatre-vingt-dix francs! murmura Mme de Boves, il faut vraiment ne pas avoir un sou pour s\'en passer.
FRENCH   C\'étaient les galoches de sa mère.
FRENCH   L\'homme filait de son côté, ravi de reprendre son existence de garçon, et Albert, soulagé, courait à ses gueuses; si bien que, désaccoutumés du foyer, se gênant et s\'ennuyant ensemble le dimanche, tous les trois ne faisaient guère que traverser leur appartement, ainsi qu\'un hôtel banal où l\'on couche à la nuit.
FRENCH   Et il reprenait ses vieilles accusations, ses doléances désespérées sur les temps nouveaux: on n\'avait jamais vu ça, des commis gagnaient à cette heure plus que des commerçants, c\'étaient les caissiers qui rachetaient les propriétés des patrons.
ENGLISH   And so, in the sudden silence which fell, all ears were cocked to catch the conversation going on in the next room, which Mouret and Bourdoncle had just entered.
FRENCH    Depuis le matin, la cohue augmentait.
ENGLISH   What! was he going to miss the governor\'s sweetheart, from whom he had sworn to extract a five-franc piece for himself? That would be the height of ill-luck, for he hadn\'t made three francs as yet with all those other chignons who were mooning about the place!  Bouthemont was just then calling out loudly: \"Come gentlemen, some one this way!\"  Thereupon Hutin passed Madame Boutarel over to Robineau, who was doing nothing.
ENGLISH   And thereupon Denise hastened off, after again expressing her thanks.
FRENCH   Une femme entrait, allait droit où elle voulait aller, passait du jupon à la robe, de la robe au manteau, puis se retirait, sans même s\'être un peu perdue!...
FRENCH   Et le vieux marchand lançait vers Denise un coup d\'oeil oblique, allumé sous la broussaille de ses sourcils.
ENGLISH   \"Oh! the fit is perfect, madame,\" repeated Mignot.
FRENCH    -- Là, qu\'est-ce que je disais! cria la première hors d\'elle.
ENGLISH   Almost at that moment, however, the door was opened again, and two ladies were shown in.
ENGLISH   It was no longer considered good form to go and kick up a row at Bullier or prowl about the music-halls for the pleasure of hissing ugly singers.
ENGLISH   No doubt she looked better now, stiff and correct in her silk gown.
ENGLISH   And yet she had not wished for these things, she had simply presented herself, without calculation, possessed of naught but the charm of her sweetness.
FRENCH    -- Moi, je ne savais pas, répétait Pauline.
FRENCH    -- Qu\'a-t-il? murmura Mme Aurélie, toute remuée par les reproches.
FRENCH    -- Regardez donc! cria Mme de Boves, immobilisée, les yeux en l\'air.
FRENCH   Puis, lorsque son perpétuel piétinement le ramenait à l\'autre bout, il regardait les casiers noyés d\'ombre, dans lesquels achevaient de moisir quelques pièces de drap.
ENGLISH   Moreover, she did not reckon that day on seeing Madame Bourdelais either, for at the end of every month the latter shut herself up with a needlewoman to look over her young people\'s clothes.
ENGLISH   On the Monday morning even, an hour before the opening, there were still some goods remaining to be placed.
FRENCH    Et, lorsque Gaujean eut tiré de son portefeuille un petit carré de soie, il acheva de s\'exalter, et cria:  -- Mais elle est plus belle que le Paris-Bonheur! En tout cas, elle fait plus d\'effet, le grain est plus gros...
FRENCH   C\'était comme une débauche de couleurs, une joie de la rue qui crevait là, tout un coin de consommation largement ouvert, et où chacun pouvait aller se réjouir les yeux.
FRENCH    -- Ma foi, répondit-il en riant, vous avez peut-être raison...
FRENCH   Mais elle n\'était guère à sa tâche, des piles croulaient déjà.
FRENCH    On avait dû abandonner la chaise.
FRENCH   C\'était Mme Guibal qui, depuis une heure, marchait dans le magasin, d\'un pas de promenade, donnant à ses yeux la joie des richesses entassées, sans acheter seulement un mètre de calicot.
FRENCH    Et Pauline répondait:  -- Tout à l\'heure...
FRENCH   Enfin, après des augmentations successives, je viens de constater, lors du dernier inventaire, que le chiffre d\'affaires atteint aujourd\'hui le total de quatre-vingts millions; et le capital, qui n\'a guère augmenté, car il est seulement de six millions, a donc passé en marchandises sur nos comptoirs plus de douze fois.
ENGLISH    Madame Bourdelais paid and gave her address, for having come on foot she did not wish to be troubled with a parcel.
ENGLISH   Other employees were writing, Albert Lhomme being among the helpers, his face pale and heavy after a night spent in a low show at La Chapelle.
ENGLISH   Even whilst she was at table, she had thought that her heart was about to burst.
FRENCH   Enfin, il termina en prophétisant que le jeune Albert dévorerait plus tard la terre de Rambouillet avec des actrices.
FRENCH    -- Puis-je vous offrir un de ces bouquets de violettes? reprit Hutin tout haut, en montrant sur une table trois ou quatre des bouquets primes, qu\'il s\'était procurés à une caisse, pour des cadeaux personnels.
FRENCH   Quelle était donc sa faute, pour qu\'on s\'attaquât de la sorte à sa taille trop mince, à son chignon trop lourd? Mais elle souffrait surtout du rire de Mouret et de Mme Desforges, avertie par un instinct de leur entente, le coeur défaillant d\'une douleur inconnue; cette dame était bien mauvaise, de s\'en prendre ainsi à une pauvre fille qui ne disait rien; et lui, décidément, la glaçait d\'une peur où tous ses autres sentiments sombraient, sans qu\'elle pût les analyser.
FRENCH   Ce nombre de vingt-huit rayons surtout le jetait hors de lui.
ENGLISH   At Valognes she had often hummed this sentimental ballad whilst gazing into the deserted street.
FRENCH    Et la discussion finit par s\'aigrir, Baudu, la bile au visage, faisait effort pour rester souriant.
ENGLISH   Don\'t be shocked; I assure you the whole shop must think as I do.
ENGLISH   The idea of a restaurant had struck him at the wedding of a cousin, who had been made to pay ten francs for a tureen of dish water, in which floated some Italian paste.
FRENCH   Non! elle ne pouvait accepter un pareil renvoi.
ENGLISH   Beneath her attacks of sensitiveness, a strong sense of reason was constantly working, quite a feeling of bravery at finding herself weak and alone, with a cheerful determination to carry out her self-imposed task.
FRENCH    Mais Vallagnosc exagérait son pessimisme.
ENGLISH    \"Give it me, sir.\"  \"Presently, youngster,\" the old man replied in a voice that suddenly became softer.
FRENCH   Moi, tenez! j\'étais au pair, comme vous.
FRENCH    -- Enfin, voici, reprit Jean.
ENGLISH   One could divine, however, that he had some unavowed spite to satisfy.
FRENCH   Gaujean, qui achevait le pot de confiture, expliquait quels sacrifices énormes lui et ses collègues allaient s\'imposer, pour livrer une pareille étoffe à si bon compte; mais ils s\'y ruineraient plutôt, ils avaient juré de tuer les grands magasins.
FRENCH    Alors, Denise rougit fortement et balbutia:  -- Ah! tant mieux! ...
ENGLISH    \"Oh! as for suffering, that\'s not in my line,\" said Mouret, in a tone of bravado.
FRENCH    -- Comment! vous voilà! dit Mme Bourdelais.
ENGLISH   Sacked for the slightest thing! And a governor too who is always smirking round his lady customers.\"  Hutin no longer listened to him, but began to praise the Place Clichy establishment.
FRENCH   Je t\'ai écrit, c\'est vrai, mais il y a un an; et, vois tu, ma pauvre fille, les affaires n\'ont guère marché, depuis un an...
FRENCH   Mme Marty, pendant que deux garçons montaient la chaise au second étage, acheta six boutons d\'ivoire, des souris en soie, un porte-allumettes en émail cloisonné.
FRENCH   Ce fut un soulagement pour Mouret, qui put crier à l\'aise.
FRENCH   Un brusque rayon du soleil couchant, qui venait de paraître au bord d\'un grand nuage, dorait les cimes des marronniers du jardin, entrait par les fenêtres en une poussière d\'or rouge, dont l\'incendie allumait la brocatelle et les cuivres des meubles.
FRENCH   Elle le revoyait sans cesse avec cette fille aux cheveux roux, et si elle frémissait encore devant lui, c\'était peut-être de malaise.
FRENCH   Il avait la beauté d\'une fille, une beauté qu\'il semblait avoir volée à sa soeur, la peau éclatante, les cheveux roux et frisés, les lèvres et les yeux mouillés de tendresse.
ENGLISH   The last balance-sheet of the big bazaar, the turn-over of forty millions, had also revolutionized the neighbourhood.
ENGLISH   There was nothing but white; on the left a complete trousseau and a mountain of sheets, on the right some curtains draped to imitate a chapel, and numerous pyramids of handkerchiefs fatigued the eyes; while between the hung goods at the door--pieces of cotton, calico, and muslin, falling and spreading out like snow from a mountain summit--were placed some dressed prints, sheets of bluish cardboard, on which a young bride and a lady in ball costume, both life-size and attired in real lace and silk, smiled with their coloured faces.
FRENCH   Il y a là-haut la parfumerie.
ENGLISH   When Bourdoncle ventured to express certain fears with reference to the excessive development given to several departments of doubtful profit he gave vent to a laugh full of confidence, and exclaimed:  \"Pooh, pooh! my dear fellow, the place is still too small!\"  The other appeared dumbfounded, seized with a fear which he no longer attempted to conceal.
ENGLISH   There was a slow, intermittent procession wending its way past the counters; in the mercery and the haberdashery departments some women of the commoner class were pushing about, still there was hardly a soul among the linens or the woollens.
ENGLISH    \"But, my dear,\" said Madame de Boves, \"the upper skirt was covered with it as well.
FRENCH    Elle en choisit une de quatorze francs cinquante.
ENGLISH   Denise, inattentive, worrying the more about Jean after Clara\'s stories, was the only one to eat it; and all the others looked at her with disgust.
FRENCH   Quand le père Hauchecorne m\'a cédé le Vieil Elbeuf, la maison était prospère; lui-même l\'avait reçue autrefois du vieux Finet, en bon état...
FRENCH   Ne vous inquiétez pas.
ENGLISH   \"I have only one reparation to offer you,\" he resumed.
FRENCH   Cette souffrance l\'avait grandi.
FRENCH   Puis, quand il eut fait une enquête personnelle, dans un tourment nerveux qu\'il ne pouvait cacher, il se fâcha de nouveau.
FRENCH   Clara seule lâcha un mot cru à l\'oreille de Mlle de Fontenailles, qui demeura blême, le visage mort.
FRENCH   Il se baissa vivement derrière le comptoir, en feignant de rattacher les cordons d\'un de ses souliers; et, caché, il murmurait:  -- Ah! non, par exemple! qu\'un autre se la paie...
ENGLISH   At first they were captivated by an intricate arrangement: up above a number of umbrellas, placed obliquely, seemed to form a rustic roof; upon rods beneath them hung a quantity of silk stockings displaying neat ankles and well rounded calves, some of them dotted with rosebuds, others of divers hues, the black ones open-worked and the red ones elegantly clocked; whilst those which were of a flesh tint, looked, with their satiny texture, as soft as skin itself.
FRENCH    Il s\'était assis près de Vallagnosc, sur un canapé.
ENGLISH   Yes, on my word of honour!\"  A fortnight later, the battle between Robineau and The Ladies\' Paradise began.
FRENCH   De vivre toujours ensemble, de rester ici enfermés l\'un contre l\'autre, sans qu\'il y eût jamais de distraction entre nous, j\'ai dû finir par le croire mon mari, avant le temps.
FRENCH    -- Nous devrions tous nous coller dans ce trou, dit Bourras à Denise, qui était restée près de lui.
ENGLISH   And afterwards came a resident doctor, giving consultations gratis; together with baths, and hair-dressing and refreshment saloons.
FRENCH   Mais elle demeura stupéfaite: la lingère revenait doucement et frappait chez elle.
ENGLISH   For a few minutes, despite the press of business, the department exchanged these various speculations.
ENGLISH   The assistants in the shop seemed quite astonished.
FRENCH   Des bijoux, une broche, une chaîne de montre, luisaient sur sa robe de drap gros bleu, pincée coquettement à la taille; et elle souriait sous sa toque de velours, ornée d\'une grande plume grise.
FRENCH   Des dames, toutes pâles, descendaient vivement, emportaient, sans se retourner, l\'horreur de la secousse molle dont l\'omnibus leur avait remué les entrailles, en passant sur le corps.
ENGLISH   Thus it was a heavy blow for him.
ENGLISH   The second-hand was becoming terrible, of a morose severity ever since the department had conspired to get him Robineau\'s place.
FRENCH   Liénard, que son père rappelait vainement à Angers, y causait avec le beau Mignot, devenu courtier, et qui osait reparaître effrontément au Bonheur des Dames.
ENGLISH   But then, abruptly breaking off, he took up another bundle of drafts, which he began to sign whilst Bourdoncle continued to walk about, stepping towards the lofty plate-glass windows whence he glanced into the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin.
ENGLISH   Silence fell.
FRENCH   Certainement, une pauvre fille ne pouvait soutenir ses deux frères, payer la pension du petit et régaler les maîtresses du grand, en ramassant les quelques sous douteux dont les autres ne voulaient point; car il était à craindre qu\'on ne l\'appointât pas avant la reprise des affaires, en mars.
ENGLISH   They get on well, it\'s true.
FRENCH    Impressionnées par une telle assurance, ces dames se taisaient.
ENGLISH   Then, as nothing further fell from either and both became more and more uncomfortable, they parted awkwardly, and renewed their wait, one on either side at a distance of a few steps.
ENGLISH    \"Well,\" asked Mouret, \"what\'s become of you?\"  \"Nothing at all,\" replied the other.
FRENCH   J\'ai calculé qu\'il y a une baisse de quinze pour cent au moins sur leurs articles de catalogue, quand on les compare à nos prix...
ENGLISH   \"They go to Dumonteil, purchase the sole right to a design, and take three hundred pieces straight off, insisting on a reduction of half a franc a yard; and, as they pay ready money, they also secure the profit of eighteen per cent.
ENGLISH   No; a score of them got together and formed a club.
FRENCH   Jamais la chance ne leur avait souri.
FRENCH   Je n\'affirme rien, je ne les ai pas vus.
FRENCH   C\'était Baugé qui payait; mais Denise avait déclaré qu\'elle entendait prendre sa part des dépenses; on réglerait le soir.
ENGLISH   Mouret would make merry over this, notwithstanding his fever.
ENGLISH    He did not answer, but remained watching her till she had disappeared.
FRENCH    VII   Un instant, Denise était restée étourdie sur le pavé, dans le soleil encore brûlant de cinq heures.
FRENCH   Mais nous ne pourrions tolérer des choses pareilles chez nous.
ENGLISH   The servant dusted the shelves; and it was even a question of replacing her by a charwoman.
ENGLISH   As she confessed one day, when talking to Mouret, these girls were all about the same, one was no better than another.
ENGLISH   In the galleries, the bare brick-work of the arches was also decorated in bright colours.
FRENCH   Jean avait écarté l\'oncle, qui regardait le trou d\'un air béant.
ENGLISH   These rooms were like narrow cells, glazed with ground glass, and not even husbands were allowed to enter them.
FRENCH   Aussi, lorsque Favier revint de la caisse où il l\'avait conduite, communiqua-t-il ses réflexions à Hutin.
ENGLISH   The house too small! an establishment which comprised nineteen departments, and numbered four hundred and three employees!  \"Of course,\" resumed Mouret, \"we shall be obliged to enlarge our premises again before another eighteen months are over.
FRENCH   Mais, lorsqu\'il aperçut Denise, il fit le gros dos et passa d\'un air aimable.
FRENCH   Mais la panique souffla plusieurs jours encore, car, après la scène, Mouret s\'était promené d\'un bout à l\'autre des magasins, l\'oeil terrible, sabrant devant lui ceux qui osaient simplement lever les yeux.
ENGLISH    Then Madame Robineau, seated on the floor, with her head on a level with the stretcher, her cheek resting against the sacking on which her husband was lying, relieved her heart.
FRENCH   Les trois ou quatre clientes qui achetaient des gants, restaient effarées.
ENGLISH   It would be wrong to wish for him still!\"  Silence fell between them.
ENGLISH   You\'ve seen his display, haven\'t you? He always places his finest mantles there, surrounded by a framework of cloth in pieces--a cheapjack parade to tempt the hussies.
ENGLISH    Thereupon Mouret followed her.
FRENCH   La soie, plus que les lainages encore, enrageait, lorsqu\'il lui fallait conduire aux confections une dame, qui se décidait pour un manteau, après s\'être fait montrer des taffetas et des failles.
ENGLISH   A fine, strong, healthy woman, who had never known what illness was! There\'s some of her blood in the foundations of that house.\"  So speaking she pointed to the establishment opposite with her pale and trembling hand.
FRENCH    -- Le père est là-haut, reprit Mme Baudu de sa voix brisée.
ENGLISH   She nodded towards the pattern-room and then seemed to be making a report.
ENGLISH   Marguerite, now second-hand, was full of praise for her.
ENGLISH   Beaten at home, beaten in Paris, beaten everywhere! I\'ve now been here four years and am still the last in the department.
FRENCH   Cependant, les deux hommes se retirèrent dans une pièce voisine, tandis que les vendeuses fouillaient la comtesse et lui ôtaient même sa robe, afin de visiter sa gorge et ses hanches.
FRENCH   Désireuse d\'éviter à Pépé des tristesses inutiles, elle l\'avait laissé chez Mme Gras, en se promettant d\'aller l\'y chercher l\'après-midi, pour lui faire embrasser son oncle et sa tante.
ENGLISH    Thereupon Madame Robineau, whom a secret anxiety seemed to be continually attracting towards the street, said quickly: \"Ah, a little while ago, wasn\'t it? I\'m waiting for him, he ought to be back by now.
ENGLISH   Later on, when Madame Baudu was already in bed, her husband remained for a long time walking about the room.
FRENCH   Et, dans les écuries royales, installées rue Monsigny, en face des magasins, se trouvaient cent quarante-cinq chevaux, tout un luxe d\'attelage déjà célèbre.
ENGLISH   Bourras caught his neighbour by the buttonhole, and without allowing him to say a word, as if goaded on by his presence, roared in his face: \"What do you think they have the cheek to offer me? Eighty thousand francs! They\'ve got to that point, the brigands! they think I\'m going to sell myself like a prostitute.
ENGLISH    Towards the end of September the poor girl experienced the blackest misery.
FRENCH   Mme Aurélie finit par donner raison à Marguerite.
ENGLISH   Forty thousand of these were ready; there were men specially placed for their distribution; and to see the customers on their way out, one might have imagined that a flight of enormous soap-bubbles, reflecting the fiery glare of the parasols, was hovering in the air.
FRENCH    -- Quand je te dis qu\'elle est la femme d\'un papetier!:..
ENGLISH   Madame Frédéric, usually so discreet, shook her head with an incredulous air.
ENGLISH   Certainly a poor girl could not support her two brothers, pay the little one\'s board and lodging, and stand treat for the big one\'s sweethearts with the few paltry sous she picked up from the others\' cast-off customers; for it was to be feared that she would not get any salary until business improved in March.
FRENCH   Le magasin sentait le désordre et l\'abandon des luttes dernières, dans un commerce qui se meurt.
ENGLISH    \"We are very pleased with you, mademoiselle,\" said he, \"and we have thought of proving our satisfaction.
ENGLISH    \"Mine is pretty tender, all the same,\" said Mignot.
ENGLISH   But this offer redoubled the old man\'s anger; he refused in an insulting manner.
ENGLISH    It so happened that Deloche was that day speaking of Valognes.
FRENCH    Il y eut un silence.
FRENCH   Si les mains de la jeune fille tremblaient toujours un peu, d\'être ainsi traitée en face de lui, elle acceptait les nécessités du métier, avec la résignation fière d\'une fille de courage.
ENGLISH   There was no gratitude shown for services rendered.
FRENCH    Mme Baudu restait toujours immobile.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! delicious! it makes you think you are in the East; doesn\'t it?\"  \"A real harem, and not at all dear!\"  \"And the Smyrnas! oh, the Smyrnas! what tones, what delicacy!\"  \"And that Kurdestan! Just look, a real Delacroix!\"  The crowd was thinning.
ENGLISH   So they were kicking up a row about her.\"  \"In any case,\" said Pauline, stiffly, \"she\'s precious ugly, with her carroty hair.
FRENCH    -- Qui prend mon riz contre son dessert? demanda Hutin.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! vous n\'êtes pas raisonnable...
FRENCH   Et, derrière sa jolie tête, à la barbe soignée, aux yeux couleur de vieil or, elle voyait la femme morte, cette Mme Hédouin, dont le sang avait scellé les pierres de la maison.
FRENCH    -- Tu ne dis rien? répéta Baudu.
FRENCH   Pauline, sans doute, avait un mari dans la maison; elle se méfiait pourtant, elle n\'en était pas moins impossible au comptoir; et, afin de retarder un renvoi probable, elle se serrait à étouffer, résolue de cacher ça tant qu\'elle pourrait.
FRENCH    -- Oh! ma chère, balbutia Pauline très rouge, ne dites rien, n\'est-ce pas?  Baugé, avec ses gros membres, sa carrure de géant, tremblait ainsi qu\'un petit garçon.
ENGLISH   In fact, I thought to myself: It isn\'t possible, he\'s boasting, he can\'t be so strong as that! And now there you are! So though you obtain all you can from woman and work her as you would a coal mine, it\'s simply in order that she may work you afterwards, and force you to refund! And take care, for she\'ll draw more money from you than you have ever drawn from her.\"  He laughed louder still, and Vallagnosc standing by also began to grin, without, however, saying a word.
ENGLISH   \"Presently, do get along.\"  They were now in the parcels office.
ENGLISH   Of course, it is not everything to make money; only between the poor devils possessed of a smattering of science who now block up the liberal professions, without earning enough to keep themselves from starving, and the practical fellows armed for life\'s struggle, knowing every branch of their trade, I don\'t hesitate one moment, I\'m for the latter against the former, I think they thoroughly understand the age they live in!\"  His voice had become impassioned and Henriette, who was pouring out the tea, turned her head.
FRENCH    Elle s\'entêtait à ne pas comprendre.
FRENCH   Le matin, ils arrivaient ensemble; puis, le soir, le premier libre, lorsque le déplié de son comptoir était fait, allait attendre l\'autre au café Saint-Roch, rue Saint-Roch, un petit café où se réunissaient d\'habitude les commis du Bonheur des Dames, braillant et buvant, jouant aux cartes dans la fumée des pipes.
ENGLISH    She leant forward, and perceived the umbrella-maker, motionless before the window containing the ingenious roof-like construction of umbrellas and walking-sticks which she had noticed in the morning.
ENGLISH    However, Bourdoncle, strong is his passive resistance, bent before the storm.
FRENCH   Alors, elle se reconnut, la soie devait être devant elle.
FRENCH   Alors, il ne put se contraindre davantage, il avoua, il aurait donné sa tête.
FRENCH   Du reste, je serais venue vous remercier de toutes vos bontés.
ENGLISH   \"At Luc, I think you said, to a country-woman? No, it isn\'t dear; still you had to get it mounted, hadn\'t you?\"  \"Of course,\" replied Madame Desforges.
ENGLISH    \"Well, I shall wait,\" resumed Madame Desforges.
ENGLISH   With her instinctive love of logic and life she was secretly in favour of the big shops.
FRENCH   Il mourait de sa témérité, malgré la clientèle nombreuse que les péripéties de la lutte lui avaient amenée.
ENGLISH   He was carried away by the working of the machine, seized by the same appetite as the others, that voracity which, from top to bottom, urged the lean ones to the extermination of the fat ones.
FRENCH   Une machine à pelurer les pommes de terre fonctionnait avec un tic-tac de moulin.
ENGLISH   And the roof of The Ladies\' Paradise, the big golden letters of the sky signs, the banners fluttering in the heavens, still flamed with the reflections of the setting sun, looking so colossal in the oblique light that they evoked the thought of some monster of advertising, some phalansterium whose buildings, incessantly multiplied, in turn covered up every district, as far as the distant woods of the suburbs.
FRENCH    Il ne put continuer.
FRENCH   Hein? tu dis à Luc, chez une ouvrière du pays?...
ENGLISH   She was carefully examining a piece of Paris Delight, for she had come on purpose to profit by the exceptional cheapness of this silk, if she found it really advantageous.
FRENCH   Un instant, Baudu hocha la tête en silence; puis, il traversa la rue pour rentrer chez lui, les jambes cassées, en répétant seulement:  -- Ah! mon Dieu!...
FRENCH   Et l\'on vous tient sous les verrous comme des galériens, lorsque tout Paris se promène!  Il passa la pièce à Hutin.
FRENCH   Devant ce sourire muet, Denise trembla, comme si elle était en faute.
FRENCH   Vous y laisserez autre chose que votre argent.
FRENCH    Dès ce matin-là, Denise obtint de Mouret les compensations qu\'elle jugerait légitimes, le jour où les Baudu et le vieux Bourras succomberaient.
FRENCH    -- Mettez une épingle ici.
ENGLISH   He, Favier, hoped to get the second-hand\'s place, should his friend be appointed manager.
FRENCH   Vraiment, il fallait être mal bâti, avoir le cerveau et les membres attaqués, pour se refuser à la besogne, en un temps de si large travail, lorsque le siècle entier se jetait à l\'avenir.
ENGLISH   It is unbearable!\"  The cashier, thinking it advisable to defend himself, called as a witness the assistant who had tied up the packet.
ENGLISH   No, the night was intended for sleep; they must all sleep, or they would be sent to the right-about!  \"Things are getting rather warm!\" remarked Hutin.
FRENCH    -- Son pied va mieux, elle descend, continuait-elle.
ENGLISH   \"Six and a quarter would be too large for a hand like yours.\"  Half-lying on the counter, he held her hand, taking her fingers one by one and slipping the glove on with a long, renewed, persistently caressing touch, looking at her the while as if he expected to see in her face some sign of pleasure.
FRENCH    -- Vous ne mourrez pas, madame.
ENGLISH   They took a cab, and on the way Denise was stupefied to learn that her friend would not return to The Paradise till the morrow, having squared matters with Madame Cabin by giving her a five-franc piece.
FRENCH   D\'abord, les parents avaient couché la malade dans leur propre chambre, sur la rue; mais la vue du Bonheur des Dames, en face, la bouleversait, et ils avaient dû la ramener chez elle.
ENGLISH    It was not so easy to tell the news to old Bourras however.
ENGLISH   She was sometimes obliged to reply by a smile to a friendly nod from Pauline, for whom Baugé waited regularly every evening at half-past eight, beside the fountain on the Place Gaillon.
ENGLISH   There was a great demand for extras, they gorged themselves with jam.
ENGLISH   She had acquired this absolute authority by her very moderation.
FRENCH    Entre elles, jamais encore elles n\'avaient parlé ouvertement de Mouret.
FRENCH    -- Fameux! cria-t-il, en palpant la soie.
ENGLISH    \"So you see, uncle,\" continued Denise, \"Jean will commence his apprenticeship at his new master\'s to-morrow.
FRENCH   Et, sous les regards de ces dames et de ces messieurs, qui l\'étudiaient, qui la pesaient, comme une jument que des paysans marchandent à la foire, Denise achevait de perdre contenance.
ENGLISH   At the windows the blinds hung motionless, without the slightest flapping.
FRENCH   Boutarel, un gros homme sanguin, lâcha sa fille, effaré, à la recherche de sa femme, il finit par retrouver cette dernière dans un salon d\'essayage, devant lequel on offrit poliment de le faire asseoir.
FRENCH   Hutin?  Et, comme celui-ci ne répondait décidément pas, ce fut le vendeur inscrit à la suite qui reçut la dame couperosée.
ENGLISH    She felt thoroughly worn out.
ENGLISH   Nevertheless she felt a strong desire to find some work elsewhere, for she often saw him inventing some trifle for her to do and fully understood that he did not require a workwoman in the present collapse of his business, and was merely employing her out of charity.
FRENCH    -- Encore! reprit Pauline, en se retournant.
ENGLISH   From all the surrounding streets, illumined by a pale early light, falling from an ashen sky, shopmen were hurriedly approaching with their coat-collars turned up, and their hands in their pockets, taken unawares by this first chill of winter.
FRENCH    -- Ce qui m\'étonne, reprit Henriette, c\'est que M.
ENGLISH    Meantime, downstairs at the door, Denise found her brother Jean.
ENGLISH   She bought it, and the salesman who accompanied her thereupon went off, leaving the chair and the parcels behind him with all the debit-notes attached to the goods.
ENGLISH   Decidedly the governor was going mad, no one understood the meaning of it all, and general consternation prevailed.
FRENCH   Elles s\'en grisaient.
FRENCH   C\'est une question de tempérament sans doute.
ENGLISH   A singular womanly modesty always prevented her from approaching certain tender, delicate subjects with him.
FRENCH    -- Je passe devant, pour que vous ne tombiez pas, dit Bourras dans l\'allée humide qui longeait la boutique.
FRENCH   La jeune fille était demeurée au milieu du magasin, intimidée, désireuse d\'obtenir du commis des renseignements plus complets.
ENGLISH   You reached it by an intricate network of stairs and passages.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, vous dites qu\'il est de votre pays...
ENGLISH   You must come to a decision.\"  Without stopping he replied: \"No doubt; but what would you have me do? I\'ve tried to sell, but no one has come.
ENGLISH   She, conciliatory and smiling, had the little ones placed in a row, on chairs; and when among the number there happened to be a rosy-cheeked little angel, whose pretty face tempted her, she would insist on serving her herself, bringing the dress and trying it on the child\'s dimpled shoulders, with the tender precaution of an elder sister.
FRENCH   Il avait trop d\'argent, il était le maître après tout.
FRENCH   Ses yeux ne se levaient même pas sur la façade triomphante du Bonheur des Dames, dont les lignes architecturales se perdaient à droite et à gauche, aux deux bouts de la rue.
FRENCH   Et, comme Gaujean se retirait avec la jeune fille, il lui confessa que ce pauvre diable de Robineau avait raison.
FRENCH   Eh bien! allez, ma chère, ne vous gênez pas avec nous.
FRENCH   Du reste, le Bonheur perfectionna immédiatement l\'invention.
ENGLISH   Clara was a scandal and merely remained at the shop under pretence of leading a respectable life in order to shield herself from her family; for she was mortally afraid of old Prunaire, who had threatened to come to Paris and break her arms and legs with his clogs.
ENGLISH   She had doubtless guessed Geneviève\'s jealous agony; but she did not dare to inform her husband of it.
FRENCH   Chez nous, on aime les clientes.
FRENCH   Elle fouillait dans le tas, ses mains devenaient molles, des chaleurs lui montaient aux épaules.
ENGLISH   What do you do?\" he merely replied: \"Nothing.\"  Octave began to laugh.
ENGLISH   She made a first halt before the trousseaux, tempted by some chemises which Pauline sold her; and Marguerite then found herself relieved of the burden of the chair, which Pauline had to take, with the debit-notes.
ENGLISH    \"And who for indeed?\" resumed Denise.
ENGLISH   I will assure you a little fortune.\"  \"No, thanks; I should soon get tired of doing nothing.
FRENCH   Je t\'emmènerai aux vacances...
ENGLISH    It was a woman of forty-five, who occasionally journeyed to Paris from the depths of some out-of-the-way department where she saved her money up for months together.
FRENCH   Et, sous la curiosité bavarde dont elles accablaient le jeune homme, apparaissaient leurs tempéraments particuliers d\'acheteuses: Mme Marty, emportée par sa rage de dépense, prenant tout au Bonheur des Dames, sans choix, au hasard des étalages; Mme Guibal, s\'y promenant des heures sans jamais faire une emplette, heureuse et satisfaite de donner un simple régal à ses yeux; Mme de Boves, serrée d\'argent, toujours torturée d\'une envie trop grosse, gardant rancune aux marchandises, qu\'elle ne pouvait emporter; Mme Bourdelais, d\'un flair de bourgeoise sage et pratique, allant droit aux occasions, usant des grands magasins avec une telle adresse de bonne ménagère, exempte de fièvre, qu\'elle y réalisait de fortes économies; Henriette enfin, qui, très élégante, y achetait seulement certains articles, ses gants, de la bonneterie, tout le gros linge.
ENGLISH   \"It would be wrong.
ENGLISH   A warmth came from this man\'s burning grasp, filling her with a delicious cowardice.
FRENCH   La vieille honnêteté maniaque du boutiquier se réveillait en lui; c\'était ce garçon prudent qui avait raison, car il n\'y a pas de sentiment dans le commerce, il n\'y a que des chiffres.
FRENCH   Peut-être, d\'autres, à son exemple, veillaient-elles pour se raccommoder, malgré le règlement; mais ce devait être avec les précautions qu\'elle prenait elle-même, les gestes ralentis, les moindres chocs évités, car un silence frissonnant sortait seul des portes closes.
ENGLISH   However, her son Albert\'s bad conduct was a source of great trouble to her, and she would have retired into the country had it not been for the inroads made on the family savings by this scapegrace, whose terrible extravagance threatened to swallow up the Rigolles property piece by piece.
FRENCH   On signalait la présence de Mouret et de Bourdoncle dans le couloir.
FRENCH   Octave Mouret, qui a le plus vif désir de vous témoigner sa grande admiration.
FRENCH    -- Tu le vois, elles sont chez elles, répéta Mouret, qui montrait d\'un geste large l\'entassement de femmes dont craquaient les rayons.
FRENCH   Pépé était tombé malade, un gros rhume inquiétant.
ENGLISH   Just tell them to do me an extra, an omelet, nice and soft, if possible.\"  Then to while away the time, she took out some chocolate which she began eating with her bread, for she always had her pockets full of sweetmeats.
FRENCH   Ils roulaient des boulettes de mie de pain, revenaient sur les mêmes histoires, dans l\'odeur de graillon, qu\'ils ne sentaient plus, et dans la chaleur d\'étuve, qui leur rougissait les oreilles.
FRENCH   Et elle aperçut Mouret.
ENGLISH   He had been at The Paradise for seven years, and only that afternoon had been talking to the principals.
FRENCH   Trois garçons, continuellement, essuyaient et emplissaient les verres.
FRENCH   Garde pour toi ta mauvaise conduite.
ENGLISH   Then they spoke of a piece at the Vaudeville, in which a counter-jumper played a nasty part, which annoyed several of them, whilst others began anxiously wondering at what time they would get away that evening, having invitations to pass the evening at friends\' houses.
ENGLISH   Hutin and Favier went down.
ENGLISH   And then he stammered out: \"It must have been in the blood, his father died last year through having led a dissolute life.\"  And once more he looked round the dim shop, his eyes wandering from the empty counters to the full shelves and then resting on Madame Baudu, who was still sitting erect at the pay-desk, waiting in vain for the customers who did not come.
ENGLISH   The prices, instead of being settled by fifty houses as they formerly used to be, are now fixed by four or five, which have lowered them, thanks to the power of their capital, and the strength of their immense custom.
FRENCH   Marguerite se rallia.
FRENCH   Mme Bourdelais, désireuse de rattraper ses dépenses, avait de nouveau conduit ses trois enfants au buffet; maintenant, la clientèle s\'y ruait dans une rage d\'appétit, les mères elles-mêmes s\'y gorgeaient de malaga; on avait bu, depuis l\'ouverture, quatre-vingts litres de sirop et soixante-dix bouteilles de vin.
ENGLISH   Madame Desforges bought nothing in the dress and costume department.
FRENCH    -- Alors, continua Pauline, vous ne vous en sortirez pas, c\'est moi qui vous le dis!...
FRENCH   Mouret et Bourdoncle entraient dans la galerie; et, comme le premier s\'arrêtait de nouveau en face de la jeune fille, sans lui adresser du reste la parole, Mme Desforges et Mme Guibal passèrent.
FRENCH   Vous avez vu? ce n\'est pas plus difficile que ça...
FRENCH   Un silence régna, dans le salon aux tentures riantes, garni d\'une telle profusion de plantes vertes, qu\'il y avait comme un petit bois entre les deux fenêtres.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! extraordinary!\" repeated the ladies.
FRENCH    Alors, Denise, poussée à bout, eut une parole fâcheuse.
ENGLISH   And he continued listening to them with one ear, whilst the young man, inflamed by his desire to convince him, went yet deeper into the question, explaining the mechanism of the new style of drapery business.
FRENCH   Puis, elle la reconnut, avec ses deux étages bas, sa façade couleur de rouille, étranglée entre le Bonheur des Dames et l\'ancien hôtel Duvillard.
FRENCH   Baudu et Denise trouvèrent Vinçard en grande conférence avec deux messieurs.
ENGLISH   You follow me, don\'t you? nothing can be clearer.\"  The baron again shook his head doubtfully.
FRENCH    -- Quelle est la caisse qui a débité ça? demanda Mouret.
ENGLISH   They\'re getting tired of belonging to you, and you now belong to them, my dear fellow: it\'s only just!\"  Then he joked him, well aware as he was of the young man\'s notorious love affairs.
ENGLISH   \"Show who you are.\"  At heart she preferred to remain neutral.
ENGLISH   On Sundays, when she was able to cook a piece of veal in the stove, on her knees before the fire, the tiny room re-echoed with the gaiety of children, careless about existence.
ENGLISH   One of them, short but well set and good looking, with a pinky skin, was endeavouring to blend the colours of some silks for an indoor show.
ENGLISH   They were prohibited from going up to their rooms in the day-time; they did not live there, but merely slept there at night, climbing the stairs only at the last minute, and coming down again in the morning when still half asleep, hardly awakened by a rapid wash; and this hurry-skurry which night and morning swept through the corridor, the fatigue of thirteen hours\' work which threw them all on their beds thoroughly worn out, made the upper part of the house like an inn traversed by tired and illtempered travellers.
ENGLISH   \"If I were you I would just catch them nicely! They are going to enjoy themselves.
ENGLISH   And after? well! after, we\'ll find a means of turning it over still more.\"  \"So you\'ll finish by swallowing up all the money in Paris, as you\'d swallow a glass of water?\"  \"Most decidedly.
FRENCH   À moins, cependant, qu\'elle ne fût en deuil de sa mère.
FRENCH    -- À la soupe! cria le drapier, en se tournant vers sa nièce.
FRENCH   On parlait fort, il semblait que le Bonheur des Dames agonisât.
FRENCH   Alors, Mouret, enchanté, s\'arrêta, pour crier aux garçons:  --Très bien, mes enfants! Maintenant, un coup de balai, et voilà qui est beau!  Mais, en se tournant, il aperçut Denise.
FRENCH   Justement, comme Mme de Boves et sa fille Blanche se tenaient sur le trottoir d\'en face, hésitantes, elles furent abordées par Mme Marty, également accompagnée de sa fille Valentine.
ENGLISH   But another spectacle rendered them grave.
FRENCH   Dans neuf ans, il espérait bien être mort, pour ne pas voir ça.
ENGLISH   His small eyes twinkled in his broad face, and he stood there with his mouth open--with him a sign of profound agitation.
ENGLISH    \"I really don\'t know as yet, sir,\" she replied.
ENGLISH    Marguerite and Clara began to laugh.
ENGLISH    Meanwhile, Madame Desforges continued her purchases.
ENGLISH   \"Now you may go,\" he said at last, sitting down and taking up his pen.
FRENCH   Même, sans avoir la moindre envie d\'en acheter, elle se fit montrer de la grenadine et de la gaze de Chambéry.
FRENCH   Il prit l\'éventail, l\'examina; et il allait se prononcer, lorsque le domestique ouvrit la porte, en disant:  -- Madame Marty.
ENGLISH   Then suddenly yielding to an inspiration of her heart, Denise knelt down before Geneviève and throwing her sisterly arms round her neck, kissed her, and assured her that everything would yet turn out all right, that she would marry Colomban, would get well, and live happily.
ENGLISH    But his sufferings were destined to increase, for he became jealous.
ENGLISH   And in this uncertain glimmer, the electric lamps lighted up one by one, their globes of an opaque whiteness studding with moons the distant depths of the departments.
ENGLISH   Then they attacked Clara, who hardly knew how to spend the money she made by her vices.
FRENCH    Mouret salua ces dames, qu\'il connaissait.
ENGLISH   How was he to stop her talk? How tell Denise that he adored her, that she alone existed for him at this moment, and that he was ready to sacrifice for her all his former caprices of a day? The worst of women would not have indulged in the equivocal familiarities of this well-born lady.
ENGLISH   \"Only a shop-girl waiting to see me.\"  The door had remained half-open as the servant was bringing in the tea.
FRENCH   La direction se montrait impitoyable, devant la moindre plainte des clientes; aucune excuse n\'était admise, l\'employé avait toujours tort, devait disparaître ainsi qu\'un instrument défectueux, nuisant au bon mécanisme de la vente; et les camarades baissaient la tête, ne tentaient même pas de le défendre.
ENGLISH   At this thought he felt as if pecked to the heart by a favourite bird, with which he had been playing.
ENGLISH   At the abrupt movement which she made to escape him, he caught sight of her.
ENGLISH   Besides, I was pretty well satisfied with a first purchase I made--a travelling cloak.
FRENCH   Il eut le mot de Bourdoncle, un mot que lui souffla sa vieille expérience.
FRENCH    Il fallut que Mme Aurélie intervînt.
FRENCH    Et Denise marchait à petit pas, la rotonde aux épaules, en disant:  -- Elle est plus chaude...
FRENCH   Son sourire s\'effaça, elle répondit:  -- Oui, monsieur...
FRENCH    Maintenant, telle était sa vie.
FRENCH   Ils auraient mis les volets, sans leur vieil orgueil commercial qui les tenait encore debout devant le quartier.
ENGLISH    \"Why, she\'s really pretty,\" whispered Mouret to Bourdoncle.
ENGLISH    \"By the way,\" cried Favier, \"you\'ve heard the news?\"  But his voice was drowned by Mignot asking: \"Who doesn\'t like artichoke; I\'ll sell my dessert for an artichoke.\"  No one replied.
FRENCH    Lorsque Denise revint de ces espaces, de ce développement du Bonheur à ses pensées flottaient comme dans une solitude, elle vit que Deloche s\'était emparé de sa main.
FRENCH    -- Vous savez, ces dames des confections font une figure! Puis, s\'interrompant:  -- À propos, vous vous souvenez de Clara Prunaire.
FRENCH    -- Alors, elle ne va pas, cette confection? reprit Mme de Boves.
ENGLISH   She recalled the long struggle of the two shops, again saw herself at the funerals of Geneviève and Madame Baudu, and beheld The Old Elbeuf overthrown, utterly ruined by The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   Une nappe de soleil tombait des vitres du hall, qui laissaient voir le bleu ardent du ciel.
FRENCH   Rayon de l\'accoucheuse, va! Si elle a entendu, elle doit être contente!  Ils étaient dehors.
ENGLISH   The old madman, as he called him, was the plague of his life, and spoilt his triumph by his idiotic obstinacy in not giving up his house, that ignoble hovel which was a disgrace to The Ladies\' Paradise, the only little corner of the vast block that had escaped conquest.
ENGLISH   There was a silence.
FRENCH   Mignot demandait:  -- Qui est-ce qui n\'aime pas l\'artichaut? Je vends mon dessert contre un artichaut.
ENGLISH   And all at once Mouret interfered: \"But why are you endeavouring to please the eye?\" he asked.
FRENCH    -- Non, monsieur, répondit-elle, je ne pourrai pas.
ENGLISH   At this moment, they are here, eating out of my very plate, so to say!\"  And the shop shook under his heavy fist as he banged it on the counter, making the umbrellas and the parasols dance again.
FRENCH   Il n\'osait lui poser des questions, sachant de quelle manière on était reçu, dans ces moments de crise.
ENGLISH    But he shrugged his shoulders.
ENGLISH   Just consider that it would increase our business tenfold! We should see our money back in two years.
FRENCH    Alors, elle voulut visiter.
ENGLISH   And when he saw her weeping like that with a silent, despairing dignity, never making the slightest attempt at retaliation, Mouret no longer hesitated; his heart went forth to her full of immense affection.
ENGLISH   Meanwhile Vallagnosc had come up, on seeing that they had finished talking business.
ENGLISH   So what was the use of upsetting her life, the maternal devotion which she had vowed for her two brothers? However, she did not sleep; insomnia gained upon her and a crowd of indistinct forms flitted before her closed eyes, then vanished in the darkness.
FRENCH   Elle avaient repris l\'étoffe, l\'examinaient de nouveau, lorsqu\'elles se sentirent touchées à l\'épaule.
FRENCH   Il est vrai qu\'elle m\'a parlé d\'une cheviotte anglaise, affichée en face dix sous meilleur marché, la même que chez nous, paraît-il.
FRENCH   Seulement, je m\'en vais, voyez-vous, et si je vous appelais cette nuit, c\'était par crainte de m\'en aller avant le jour...
ENGLISH   There was no tablecloth, the plates clattered on the bare mahogany, and in this particular corner everybody was raising exclamations, for the number of legs distributed was really prodigious.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle regardait ses ongles avec impatience.
FRENCH   Mme Aurélie arriva la première; il fallut attendre le caissier, qui vint en retard, effaré par tout un après-midi de musique; quant au jeune Albert, il avait accepté l\'invitation, mais il ne parut pas.
FRENCH   Et, si cet homme devait l\'épouser, elle abandonnait tout pour le suivre: cela expliquait son obstination.
FRENCH    La surprise le tenait immobile.
FRENCH   Dans un des accès de brusque franchise, dont il accablait parfois ses familiers, il déclara qu\'il était au fond plus juif que tous les juifs du monde: il tenait de son père, auquel il ressemblait physiquement et moralement, un gaillard qui connaissait le prix des sous; et, s\'il avait de sa mère ce brin de fantaisie nerveuse, c\'était là peut-être le plus clair de sa chance, car il sentait la force invincible de sa grâce à tout oser.
FRENCH   Peut-être, cette lointaine querelle venait-elle de ce que la lingerie portait des robes de laine, lorsque les confections étaient vêtues de soie; en tout cas, les lingères parlaient de leurs voisines avec des moues révoltées d\'honnêtes filles; et les faits leur donnaient raison, on avait remarqué que la soie semblait influer sur les débordements des confectionneuses.
ENGLISH   Was not the founding of such a gigantic shop a fanciful, imprudent scheme? Would he not court certain failure by thus enlarging the drapery trade beyond all reasonable bounds? In short, he didn\'t believe in the idea and refused his support.
FRENCH   Il y avait là des cachemires, des serges, des vigognes, et il lui jurait qu\'il n\'existait rien de meilleur, on n\'en voyait pas la fin.
FRENCH   Ah! vous êtes heureux que nous ayons égard aux bons services de votre mère!  Mais, à ce moment, Lhomme accourut.
FRENCH   Celui-ci avait déjà la promesse d\'être nommé premier.
ENGLISH   Now, Monsieur Favier, it\'s your turn.\"  Favier, greatly amused at heart by this adventure, gave his friend a glance, as if to excuse himself.
FRENCH   Quand on voulait faire rendre aux gens tout leur effort, disait-il souvent, et même tirer d\'eux un peu d\'honnêteté, il fallait d\'abord les mettre aux prises avec leurs besoins.
FRENCH    -- Madame désire-t-elle des jarretières bon marché? dit un vendeur à Mme Desforges, en la voyant immobile.
FRENCH    -- Vous entendez, monsieur Baudu? reprit-il, votre nièce est avec eux, c\'est elle qu\'ils ont chargée de me corrompre...
FRENCH    Elle eut une courte révolte.
ENGLISH   If you were not disgusted at being so disgracefully chucked out you must have strong reasons for liking them; and even if you went back again, I should think none the worse of you.
ENGLISH   Yielding to the bitterness of her abandonment, her forehead against the cold glass, she gazed at The Old Elbeuf opposite, thinking that she ought to have implored her uncle to keep her.
ENGLISH   Perhaps she had formerly displayed rather more than a motherly feeling for one of her son\'s friends, but she now occupied too high a position in the business to indulge in such childishness.
ENGLISH   He kept an umbrella and walking-stick shop, did repairs, and even carved handles, which had won for him an artistic celebrity in the neighbourhood.
FRENCH   Comme elle était contente de sa cuisinière, elle désirait lui donner une robe.
ENGLISH   \"A nice bit of work they\'re doing, eh? the robbers!\"  She no longer dared to speak; her heart was stirred by the lamentable wretchedness of the old place; she was unable to take her eyes off the mouldy stones that were falling.
ENGLISH   And when she went in again, after closing the little round door in the shutters, she found Madame Robineau still clasping her husband in her arms, in the vague half-light which came from the two stars cut in the sheet-iron.
FRENCH   Elle ne songeait guère pourtant aux menaces qui soufflaient, elle était tout entière à l\'angoisse d\'une aventure de Jean, plus terrifiante que les autres.
ENGLISH   He stood there for several minutes, mute and smiling, with the gay victorious face of stock-taking days; and it was only on his lips that a slight feverish quiver could be detected.
ENGLISH   People still come to me for men\'s goods, velvets and velveteens for shooting suits, cloths for liveries, without speaking of flannels and _molletons_, of which I defy him to show so complete an assortment as my own.
ENGLISH   There was still the checking to be done, and for this, being desirous of silence, she retired into the pattern-room, taking Denise with her.
FRENCH   Brusquement, il intervint.
FRENCH   Et, si elle vient, vous savez...
FRENCH   Pauline occupait bien une chambre voisine, à droite de la chambre de Denise; mais, comme elle disparaissait au sortir de table et ne revenait pas avant onze heures, cette dernière l\'entendait seulement se mettre au lit, sans jamais la rencontrer, en dehors des heures de travail.
FRENCH   À quoi bon tant travailler, puisque l\'argent ne donnait pas tout? C\'était lui qui aurait fermé boutique et qui se serait allongé sur le dos, pour ne plus remuer un doigt, le jour où il aurait reconnu qu\'avec des millions on ne pouvait même pas acheter la femme désirée! Mouret, en l\'écoutant, devenait grave.
ENGLISH   And he spoke the truth, he had quite reformed; he had long since given up Clara and had ceased to visit at Madame Desforges\'s house, where Bouthemont now reigned supreme, pending the opening of the new establishment, The Four Seasons, which was already filling the newspapers with its advertisements.
ENGLISH    \"Those chaps over there seem to be doing very well,\" remarked Favier, speaking of the salesmen in the hosiery and haberdashery departments.
FRENCH    -- Est-ce que vous désirez quelque chose chez nous? reprit-il.
ENGLISH    \"Well! you are very foolish.
FRENCH   Ça enfonce Valognes...
FRENCH   On prit un fiacre, et Denise demeura stupéfaite, lorsque, en chemin, elle sut que son amie allait passer la nuit avec le jeune homme.
ENGLISH   I shall have hardly enough to buy a pair of boots, which I want very badly.
FRENCH   Je vous en prie, considérez où un pareil oubli de vous-même pourrait vous conduire.
ENGLISH   But I should first of all like to have a talk with you.\"  The young man, who seemed to dread the interview, waited with an awkward air.
FRENCH   Et la jeune fille, ayant pris le paquet, se rendit aux confections, suivie de ses deux frères.
ENGLISH   While she was rolling her head on her folded arms, a hair-pin slipped out, and then her hair fell over her neck, burying it beneath gloomy tresses.
FRENCH   Pourquoi voulez-vous qu\'elle aille payer cette soie en fabrique plus cher qu\'elle ne la paiera chez nous?...
FRENCH   Il n\'y a plus un manche propre.
FRENCH   Il revenait à la caisse centrale, s\'irritait à la vue des coffres- forts, marchait au milieu de ces millions, dont l\'inutilité le rendait fou.
FRENCH    Et, sa dignité désormais à couvert, ayant un prétexte aux yeux de ces demoiselles qui la guettaient, elle laissa enfin seuls Mouret et Denise qu\'elle venait de rapprocher, elle sortit d\'un pas majestueux, le profil si noble, que les vendeuses n\'osèrent même se permettre un sourire.
FRENCH   Et puis, je n\'aurais jamais les avances nécessaires...
FRENCH    Mais, comme elle voulut laisser la porte ouverte, afin de surveiller ces demoiselles, le vacarme entrait, on ne s\'entendait guère plus, au fond de cette salle.
FRENCH    -- Combien, Lhomme? demanda Mouret.
ENGLISH   But how can you expect to find any one in this crowd?\"  \"It\'s magnificent, isn\'t it?\"  \"Dazzling, my dear.
ENGLISH   And in her mind the thought of The Old Elbeuf, so black and narrow, increased the immensity of this vast establishment, which seemed bathed in a golden light and similar to a city with its monuments, squares, and streets, in which it seemed impossible she should ever find her way.
ENGLISH   Special salesmen, idle and smooth-tongued Parisians, in this way got rid of considerable quantities of small trashy things.
FRENCH   Hein! vous me devrez une fière chandelle.
ENGLISH   Two allegorical female figures, with laughing faces and bare bosoms unrolled a scroll bearing the inscription \"The Ladies\' Paradise\"; then, on either side, along the Rue de la Michodière and the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, stretched the windows of the establishment, not limited merely to the corner house but comprising four others--two on the right and two on the left which had been recently purchased and fitted up.
ENGLISH   Then came the kleptomaniacs, who stole from a perverse desire, a new form of nervous affection which a doctor had classed, showing it to be the result of the temptations of the big shops.
FRENCH    If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase \"Project Gutenberg\" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle did not like these married couples; however, they had managed to get the necessary permission, and even hoped to obtain a fortnight\'s holiday for their honeymoon.
FRENCH   Clara, ennuyée de ce garçon qui lui tombait sur le dos, lui avait déjà fermé sa porte; et Colomban, désolé, la poursuivait partout, tâchait d\'obtenir d\'elle une rencontre de temps à autre, par une humilité de chien battu.
FRENCH   Toutes quatre demeuraient sur le trottoir, au milieu des bousculades de l\'entrée.
ENGLISH   You had better go on changing those tickets.
ENGLISH   That morning, buttoned up in his black frock-coat, for he was now a full-grown man, earning his twenty francs a day, he seemed so dignified and sad that his sister was surprised, having had no idea that he loved their cousin so much.
ENGLISH   At last he got more entangled than ever, awaiting some sudden impulse from Colomban, some heartfelt cry, which did not come.
FRENCH   Mais, parole d\'honneur! je ne découvre rien.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, ils n\'auraient pu, ni l\'un ni l\'autre, se vanter d\'aucune bonne fortune réelle; Mignot vivait sur la légende d\'une femme de commissaire de police tombée amoureuse de lui, tandis que Hutin avait véritablement conquis à son rayon une passementière, lasse de traîner les hôtels louches du quartier; mais ils mentaient, ils laissaient volontiers croire à des aventures mystérieuses, à des rendez-vous donnés par des comtesses, entre deux achats.
FRENCH    -- Par ici, madame, disait Denise sans une plainte, après chaque halte.
FRENCH   Puis, elles tombèrent sur Clara, une gâcheuse qui ne savait comment dépenser l\'argent de ses entreteneurs: est-ce qu\'elle n\'achetait pas trois paires de bottines à la fois, des bottines qu\'elle jetait le lendemain, après les avoir coupées avec des ciseaux, à cause de ses pieds qui étaient pleins de bosses? D\'ailleurs, ces demoiselles des nouveautés ne se montraient guère plus raisonnables que ces messieurs: elles mangeaient tout, jamais un sou d\'économie, des deux et des trois cents francs passaient par mois à des chiffons et à des friandises.
FRENCH   Il est toujours là-bas, mon oncle a dû aller le voir ce matin...
ENGLISH   She was constantly recalling his appearance with that red-haired girl, and if she still trembled before him, it was doubtless from uneasiness.
FRENCH   Après la grande mise en vente, son renvoi était certain.
FRENCH    Denise était pâle d\'émotion.
ENGLISH   Meanwhile, almost the only girl that went there in the evening was the second-hand of the corset department, Miss Powell, who strummed away at Chopin on the piano, and whose envied talents were for much in driving the others away.
FRENCH   La journée fut pour elle d\'une tristesse noire.
FRENCH    VI   Quand la morte-saison d\'été fut venue, un vent de panique souffla au Bonheur des Dames.
ENGLISH   This scene, which had diverted his thoughts from the struggle going on within him, now increased his fever, and decided him to make a supreme effort.
FRENCH   Il suivit le conseil de son ancien condisciple.
FRENCH   Et elle s\'en alla, elle descendit avec Pépé et Jean, accompagnés tous les trois de l\'auxiliaire.
ENGLISH   Mouret, on the contrary, affected to worship them, ever showed himself delighted and cajoling in their presence and was ever embarking in fresh love-affairs.
ENGLISH    \"No, Monsieur Bourras.\"  \"Well! the scoundrels have bought the Hôtel Duvillard.
ENGLISH   There at least she was lost in the crowd.
ENGLISH   This was a new spectacle, a sea of fore-shortened heads, swarming with agitation like an ant-hill.
FRENCH    En entrant, Mouret avait trouvé Denise toute droite, au milieu de la vive lumière.
FRENCH   Jean continuait à n\'être pas raisonnable, il la harcelait toujours de demandes d\'argent.
FRENCH   La phrase d\'ailleurs tomba au milieu d\'un silence décourageant.
FRENCH   Des retardataires accouraient à la file, un appétit féroce, doublé par la besogne du matin, soufflait sur les longues tables, d\'un bout à l\'autre du réfectoire.
FRENCH   Sans doute elle avait baigné ses paupières, car elles étaient fraîches, sans une rougeur.
FRENCH   Et, peu à peu, la clientèle se trouvait fleurie, les magasins s\'emplissaient de ces noces blanches, toutes les femmes promenaient un parfum pénétrant de fleur.
FRENCH   Comment! lorsqu\'il ne s\'attendait à rien, lorsqu\'il n\'y mettait pas ses forces et qu\'il cédait simplement à sa bonté!  -- Ah! mademoiselle, vous vous en repentirez, parole d\'honneur!  Denise s\'était enfuie.
FRENCH   Pépé lui-même, qui ne lâchait pas la main de sa soeur, ouvrait des yeux énormes.
FRENCH   Après le dîner, comme disaient les commis farceurs, il y avait le dessert.
ENGLISH    \"Listen, uncle,\" said Denise at last, greatly embarrassed; \"perhaps there might be a situation for you.\" And after a pause she stammered, \"Yes, I am charged to offer you a situation as inspector.\"  \"Where?\" asked Baudu.
FRENCH   Tenez! il n\'y a eu qu\'une bonne heure dans ma vie, le soir où je vous ai rencontrée à Joinville, vous vous souvenez? Un instant, sous les arbres, où il faisait si noir, j\'ai cru que votre bras tremblait, j\'ai été assez bête pour m\'imaginer...
ENGLISH   No! no! here I am, and here I intend to stay.
ENGLISH    \"You say another dozen?\" asked Denise of her brother.
ENGLISH   It so happened, on the day in question, that a slight diversion had brought back his gaiety: he had become deeply interested in an album of drawings of the mosaics and enamelled terra-cotta which were to decorate the friezes, when Jouve, out of breath, annoyed at being obliged to soil his frock coat amongst all the building materials came up to fetch him.
FRENCH   Dans cette simplicité, elle avait l\'air très jeune, un air de fille grandie trop vite, d\'une propreté de pauvre, un peu honteuse et embarrassée du luxe débordant de ses cheveux, qui crevaient la nudité de son chapeau.
FRENCH    -- Alors, je monte, ma tante, dit Denise dont le coeur se serrait, dans ce désespoir résigné que les pièces de drap exhalaient elles- mêmes.
ENGLISH   All at once he flourished his fork.
ENGLISH   Around them the night was yet paling and they could distinguish the rushes on the banks, and the lacework of the foliage, black against the twinkling stars; and a peacefulness came over them, they forgot their troubles, brought closer together, to a cordial feeling of friendship, by their ill-luck.
FRENCH   Quelle était donc la sotte qui ne savait pas se suffire, avec ses bénéfices sur la vente? Mais, quand Bouthemont eut nommé Denise, il se radoucit, il trouva des excuses.
ENGLISH   She couldn\'t take the sum out of Pépé\'s board money as this she had paid away two days before.
ENGLISH    \"Really, lace is so pretty!\" she repeated with her nervous laugh.
ENGLISH   Each of the thirty-nine departments did its work apart, without troubling about its neighbour.
FRENCH    Il eut un geste fou.
ENGLISH   In Paris, I\'ve always been a drudge.
ENGLISH    \"Poor old fellow!\" said Madame Guibal, \"he who was always so shabby, with his teacher\'s humility! And the wife?\"  \"She\'s ruining an uncle, now,\" replied Henriette, \"a worthy old man who has gone to live with her, since losing his wife.
ENGLISH    \"Come with me, we\'ll do the checking;\" she said, \"and then you can add up the figures.\"  However, as she wished to leave the door open, in order to keep an eye on her young ladies, the noise came in, and they could not hear themselves much better even in this pattern-room--a large, square apartment furnished merely with some chairs and three long tables.
FRENCH    Alors, la seconde tira le modèle d\'une armoire, et l\'explication continua.
FRENCH   Nous aurions été seuls, je n\'aurais eu qu\'à pousser un verrou.
FRENCH    -- Où étiez-vous à Valognes?  -- Chez Cornaille.
FRENCH    Mais, sur le palier du grand escalier central, le Japon l\'arrêta encore.
FRENCH    Bien des fois, Denise s\'interrogea de la sorte.
ENGLISH   \"Oh, presently, there is no hurry.\"  Then the ladies continued the discussion on the garments sold at the large establishments; and afterwards Madame de Boves spoke of her husband, who, said she, had gone to inspect the stud-farm at Saint-Lô; while at the same time Henriette related that, owing to the illness of an aunt, Madame Guibal had been suddenly called into Franche-Comté.
ENGLISH    \"Say I am coming at once,\" replied Denise, feeling very anxious.
FRENCH   La veille, on lui avait dit qu\'elle entrait au pair, c\'est-à-dire sans appointements fixes; elle aurait uniquement le tant pour cent et la guelte sur les ventes qu\'elle ferait.
ENGLISH   In the spacious room, a bright light, softened by the green plants, illumined the brass-work, and bathed the silk hangings in a tender glow; and each time the door opened one could perceive a dim corner of the ante-room, which was only lighted by two ground-glass windows.
FRENCH   Toutes les chances! Un garçon tombé du Midi à Paris, avec l\'audace aimable d\'un aventurier; et, dès le lendemain, des histoires de femme, une continuelle exploitation de la femme, le scandale d\'un flagrant délit, dont le quartier parlait encore; puis, la conquête brusque et inexplicable de Mme Hédouin, qui lui avait apporté le Bonheur des Dames.
ENGLISH   Flags were flying at the door, pieces of woollens were flapping about in the fresh morning air, animating the Place Gaillon with the bustle of a country fair; whilst along both streets the windows developed symphonious displays whose brilliant tones were yet heightened by the clearness of the glass.
ENGLISH   \"You hardly know where you are.\"  However, the ladies could not remain in the eddy of the door, right in the crush of the entrance and exit.
FRENCH   Sans doute elle rapportait que la jeune fille avait pleuré le matin.
FRENCH   Il y a d\'abord, dans ce paquet, le paletot havane que Thérèse...
FRENCH   En somme, quand elles voulaient se bien conduire, elles le pouvaient; car elles n\'étaient pas, comme les ouvrières du pavé parisien, obligées de se nourrir et de se loger: elles avaient la table et le lit, leur existence se trouvait assurée, une existence très dure sans doute.
FRENCH     Section  2.
FRENCH   Mais elle espérait bien arriver ainsi à douze cents francs, car elle savait que les bonnes vendeuses allaient jusqu\'à deux mille, quand elles prenaient de la peine.
ENGLISH    \"I should rather think they had!\" exclaimed Mignot.
FRENCH    Cependant, Mouret avait eu un geste de morne découragement.
ENGLISH    \"What is it?\" she murmured; \"are we going to move?\"  This surprise appeared to amuse Mouret, who adored these sensational effects.
FRENCH   La justice, je ne connais que ça...
ENGLISH   \"He promised to call for me on leaving the Lycée Bonaparte.\"  Forthwith she shut her bag again, and instinctively hid it away under her chair.
FRENCH   Et ça vend ce que ça veut! Entendez- vous, l\'art est fichu!  Denise, enfin, se rassura.
ENGLISH     When the dead summer season arrived, quite a hurricane of panic swept through The Ladies\' Paradise.
ENGLISH   The damp, moreover, had still further discoloured the old green sign-board; woefulness appeared on the whole frontage, livid in hue, and, as it were, shrunken.
ENGLISH   \"If I don\'t make an average of twelve francs a day, I\'m lost.
FRENCH   Ce conseil la gênait comme une idée qui ne lui était jamais venue, et dont elle ne voyait pas l\'avantage.
ENGLISH   Then one day, just as Colomban had stopped her near the fountain to talk about Clara, the latter tripped across the road; and Denise was obliged to run away, for he implored her to ask her old comrade if she would marry him.
FRENCH   Les ateliers occupaient les combles, une suite de salles basses et mansardées, éclairées de larges baies taillées dans le zinc, uniquement meublées de longues tables et de gros poêles de fonte; il y avait, à la file, des lingères, des dentellières, des tapissiers, des confectionneuses, vivant l\'été et l\'hiver dans une chaleur étouffante, au milieu de l\'odeur spéciale du métier; et l\'on devait longer toute l\'aile, prendre à gauche après les confectionneuses, monter cinq marches, avant d\'atteindre ce bout écarté de corridor.
FRENCH   Tâchez donc d\'avoir un peu de raison.
FRENCH   Les coquins ont tué mes bénéfices; mais, si je ne gagne plus, je ne perds pas encore, ou peu de chose du moins.
FRENCH   Denise avait pris Pépé auprès d\'elle, pour le faire manger proprement.
ENGLISH    He was wearing his working blouse, and was bare-headed, with his hair in disorder, its curls falling over his girlish face.
FRENCH   Elle les rencontrait parfois rue Saint-Roch, en sortant de chez Robineau.
ENGLISH   It was true, they had stolen everything from them: from the father, his fortune; from the mother, her dying child; from the daughter, the husband, for whom she had waited ten long years.
ENGLISH   Then they got to talking of the vast Cotentin pastures, surrounded with quick-set hedges, of the shady paths and lanes winding beneath elm trees, and of the grass grown roads, like alleys in a park.
ENGLISH   Bourras was at this time in a rage from morn till night, for he more than any other suffered from the uproar of the adjacent works.
FRENCH   Les sensations des premières semaines renaissaient, il lui semblait être un grain de mil sous une meule puissante; et c\'était, en elle, un abandon découragé, à se sentir si peu de chose, dans cette grande machine qui l\'écraserait avec sa tranquille indifférence.
ENGLISH   As a rule, he dealt with robberies of this sort when committed by persons of distinction.
ENGLISH   It\'s all for me that he wanted to die.
FRENCH   La veille, malgré sa plaisanterie, il avait éprouvé devant Mme Desforges, une contrariété d\'amour-propre, en voyant discuter l\'élégance d\'une de ses vendeuses.
FRENCH    -- Et avec ça, madame?.
FRENCH   Jamais il n\'aurait voulu le conclure dans les conditions présentes.
FRENCH    Paul, sans quitter le comte des yeux, répondit qu\'on attendait toujours la mort de la tante.
ENGLISH    \"Yes, yes; things are going on very well, I\'m quite satisfied,\" repeated Mouret, radiant, replying with a smile to Madame Desforges\'s loving looks.
ENGLISH   And every one cited Colomban as an unfortunate victim of love.
ENGLISH   It was especially in her department that she was seen at her best, in the midst of her little world of babies of all ages.
ENGLISH   Was it possible that his daughter was falling ill over the shopman? Did she love him so much that she could not wait? Here was another misfortune! It worried him all the more from the circumstance that he himself had fixed ideas about this marriage.
ENGLISH   And they sell just what they like! I tell you, art is done for!\"  At last Denise began to feel easier.
ENGLISH   The work was now nearly finished, the scaffoldings had been removed from the front, a whole side of the colossal edifice appeared, with its white walls and large light windows.
FRENCH   Lui, sort continuellement sur le trottoir pour la regarder.
FRENCH   Il y avait, aux dentelles, un second farceur qui poursuivait Clara de confidences abominables, simplement pour rire, si détaché au fond, qu\'il n\'essayait seulement pas de la retrouver dehors; et c\'étaient ainsi, d\'un comptoir à l\'autre, entre ces messieurs et ces demoiselles, des coups d\'oeil d\'intelligence, des mots qu\'eux seuls comprenaient, parfois des causeries sournoises, le dos à demi-tourné, l\'air rêveur, pour donner le change au terrible Bourdoncle.
ENGLISH   It was like a debauch of colour, a street pleasure bursting forth, a wealth of purchasable articles publicly displayed, on which everybody could feast their eyes.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! mamma,\" said Valentine, \"if that little costume should only fit me!\"  In a low tone, Madame Guibal was explaining her tactics to Madame Marty.
ENGLISH    There was a terrible cracking noise.
ENGLISH   But Bourdoncle had observed that her complexion was getting very pale and one morning while he was standing near her, in the under-linen department, a messenger, taking away a bundle, ran against her with such force that she cried out with pain.
ENGLISH   The two were forgotten for a moment, and, in reply to the anxious questions of Bouthemont, who wished to know what he had to expect, Mouret did not hesitate any longer, but abruptly informed him that the board of directors had decided to deprive themselves of his services.
FRENCH   Face à face, le père et la mère se contemplaient.
ENGLISH   Besides, it\'s her father who is postponing the marriage.\"  Denise sharply corrected this falsehood, certain as she was that the least insistence on the young man\'s part would have decided her uncle.
ENGLISH   She\'s a terrible woman is that delicate red-haired creature with her careless ways.
FRENCH   Le convoi avait repris sa marche lente; et, en se penchant, elle voyait en effet l\'oncle s\'entêter derrière le corbillard, de son pas alourdi, qui semblait régler le train sourd et pénible du cortège.
ENGLISH   To her his arrival came as a shock, she blushed without knowing why, and again seized by a strange fear, thinking that he was going to speak to her.
FRENCH    Lorsque Mouret reçut sa démission, il resta muet et comme froid, dans l\'effort qu\'il faisait pour se contenir.
FRENCH    -- C\'est bien, je vous crois, murmura-t-il, je ne renverrai aucun de vos camarades, puisque vous prenez tout ce monde sous votre protection...
FRENCH   Elle avait senti que la moindre insistance du jeune homme déciderait l\'oncle.
FRENCH   La maison entière, à cette heure, racontait qu\'elle avait eu jadis Hutin pour amant; on n\'osait jurer que la liaison continuât, seulement on les soupçonnait de se revoir, de loin en loin.
FRENCH   Voyons, je vous attends.
FRENCH    If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
ENGLISH   Denise, however, drew nearer, attracted by a practical pity, which prompted her to interest herself in the victims of all sorts of street accidents, such as wounded dogs, horses down, and tilers falling off roofs.
ENGLISH   It was a general unpacking, a seeming confusion of stuffs, inspected, turned over, and marked, amidst a continuous buzz of voices.
ENGLISH   Never mind, on your side you\'ve done a good stroke of business.
FRENCH   Elles en causaient, elles se la promettaient, travaillées de désir et de doute.
FRENCH   Tenez! il est là-bas, en haut du grand escalier, l\'air furieux.
FRENCH   Tenez! il ne peut s\'en empêcher, il regarde là-haut...
FRENCH   Alors, Denise, gagnée par cette familiarité, se livra davantage, laissa voir qu\'elle était pour les grands magasins, dans la bataille livrée entre ceux-ci et le petit commerce; elle s\'animait, citait des exemples, se montrait au courant de la question, remplie même d\'idées larges et nouvelles.
FRENCH   N\'importe, vous avez fait une riche affaire.
ENGLISH   Baron Hartmann watched him, seized with a fraternal admiration.
ENGLISH    \"But I didn\'t know,\" repeated Pauline.
FRENCH   Que deviendrais-je, moi?  Et, comme Denise répondait qu\'elle partait le lendemain: -- Non, non, vous croyez ça, mais je sais le contraire...
FRENCH   On la vendrait partout à sept francs.
ENGLISH   In short, after successive increases, I have just learnt, from the last stock-taking, that the business done now amounts to a total of eighty millions; the capital, which has only been slightly increased--for it does not exceed six millions--has passed over our counters, in the form of goods sold, more than twelve times in the year!\"  He raised his voice and tapped the fingers of his right hand on the palm of his left, knocking down those millions as he might have cracked nuts.
ENGLISH   To him the Paradise people were a pack of thieves and nothing more! A lying set! Cheap-jacks who would be picked out of the gutter some fine morning!  The Baudus, however, despite their determination not to change anything in the system of The Old Elbeuf, tried to sustain the competition.
ENGLISH   Look! red, green, yellow.\"  While speaking he had taken up some of the pieces of silk, throwing them together, crumpling them and producing an extremely violent effect of colour.
ENGLISH   He had with difficulty restrained himself from striking him.
FRENCH    Tous les comptoirs, au milieu des bousculades de la vente, ne causaient une fois encore que des amours du patron.
FRENCH   Mais il avait gardé sa main, il demanda:  -- Viendra-t-il?  -- Sans doute, répondit-elle.
FRENCH   Faites donc un peu attention, mademoiselle Prunaire, c\'est insupportable à la fin!  Mais un frémissement courut: Mouret et Bourdoncle faisant leur tournée d\'inspection, venaient de paraître.
ENGLISH   All this dynasty of the Lhommes, of which she was the acknowledged head, very often caused her a great deal of trouble.
ENGLISH   They were continually scouring Paris, skilfully driven by coachmen clad in black, and bearing hither and thither the gold and purple sign of The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   Un d\'eux remonta, une nappe de soleil traversa la salle, incendia le plafond.
ENGLISH   On all sides Madame Desforges saw large price-tickets bearing enormous figures and showing prominently against the bright printed cottons, the shining silks, and the sombre woollens.
FRENCH   Un garçon si froid, l\'air obéissant, dont il s\'était servi pour user Robineau et Bouthemont! ça le frappait d\'une surprise où il entrait du respect.
ENGLISH   What could she do out-of-doors, penniless and wild, and still frightened by the big city in which she only knew the streets around the shop? After venturing as far as the Palais-Royal for the sake of a little fresh air, she would quickly return, lock herself in her room and set about sewing or washing.
FRENCH   Denise le fit taire, gagnée par son embarras, n\'ayant pas besoin d\'en savoir davantage.
FRENCH   Tu veux que j\'entre en face?  Denise elle-même était gagnée par cette émotion.
FRENCH   Chaque fois qu\'il revenait devant la caisse, il regardait la banquette vide, cette banquette de velours usé, où sa femme et sa fille avaient grandi.
FRENCH    Elle étalait quatre ou cinq manteaux.
ENGLISH   He bowed, and said: \"They must be in the lace department--impossible to drag them away.
ENGLISH   He returned to the chief cashier\'s office, grew exasperated by the sight of the safes, wandered about amidst these millions, the uselessness of which was driving him mad.
FRENCH   Sans lui, j\'aurais du mal là-bas.
ENGLISH    \"Well! it\'s six o\'clock, let\'s go to dinner,\" said Baudu.
ENGLISH   When he did venture to complain things went worse than ever.
ENGLISH    Denise finished by not answering the insults.
FRENCH    -- Oh! conclut Vallagnosc, je crois qu\'il n\'est pas de taille...
FRENCH   Et tous se tinrent les côtes, lorsque Mignot ajouta:  -- Chacun son goût, Deloche mange la pêche au vin.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle, entêté, répétait de son air froid:  -- Elles se vengeront...
FRENCH   Denise, qui avait entendu, la suivit d\'un regard de remerciement, tandis que Mme Aurélie lui remettait un cahier de notes de débit à son nom, en disant:  -- Allons, demain, vous vous arrangerez mieux...
FRENCH    Baudu blêmit davantage et plia les épaules.
FRENCH   Malgré l\'assurance qu\'il affectait, quand il annonçait la culbute finale, il était plein de terreur au fond, il sentait bien le quartier envahi, dévoré peu à peu.
FRENCH   Plusieurs risquaient des bijoux, des bagues, des broches, des chaînes; mais leur coquetterie, le luxe dont elles luttaient, dans l\'uniformité imposée de leur toilette, était leurs cheveux nus, des cheveux débordants, augmentés de nattes et de chignons quand ils ne suffisaient pas, peignés, frisés, étalés.
ENGLISH   And opinions were divided.
ENGLISH   Baudu and Denise found Vinçard in consultation with two gentlemen.
ENGLISH   \"And you saw how Bourdoncle\'s face turned pale all at once.\"  Mouret shared his partner\'s indignation.
FRENCH   Elle voulait balbutier une explication.
ENGLISH    At last, he managed to sit down near Bouthemont, who had not stirred.
ENGLISH   Denise, being second-hand in her department, had one of the largest rooms with two attic windows looking into the street.
ENGLISH    As the two young women were leaving the garden of the restaurant, a timid voice murmured in the shade: \"Good evening, ladies.\"  It was Deloche.
FRENCH   Jamais il n\'avait aimé ainsi, avec ce charme puissant dans la souffrance.
FRENCH   Robineau était là, en effet.
FRENCH    Mais ce qui remuait le quartier plus encore, c\'étaient les travaux entrepris au Bonheur des Dames.
ENGLISH   It\'s very awkward.\"  He raised his voice, as he thus relieved himself.
FRENCH    D\'un mot, elle l\'arrêta:  -- Merci, je gagne maintenant plus qu\'il ne me faut.
ENGLISH   Clara, it was said, had already grown tired of Colomban, who was pursuing her everywhere, striving to obtain an occasional appointment by a sort of canine humility.
FRENCH   Elle, suffoquée, se baissa, sous le prétexte d\'arranger le ceinturon de Pépé.
FRENCH   Il ment, entendez-vous!  Et, dans l\'émotion qui le secouait, il lâchait des aveux, la voix bégayante, vidant son coeur.
ENGLISH   But if you only knew what sort of place it is----\" And in broken sentences he commenced to relate the story of that Octave Mouret to whom The Paradise belonged.
FRENCH    Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm\'s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
FRENCH   Il apportait un pain et une boîte à lait pleine de bouillon.
ENGLISH   Of course he has done me harm, the scoundrel! But up to the present he has only kept ladies\' cloths, light stuffs for dresses and heavier goods for mantles.
ENGLISH   He, nervous and worried, was sometimes rather abrupt.
FRENCH   Une fine poussière s\'élevait des planchers, chargée de l\'odeur de la femme, l\'odeur de son linge et de sa nuque, de ses jupes et de sa chevelure, une odeur pénétrante, envahissante, qui semblait être l\'encens de ce temple élevé au culte de son corps.
ENGLISH   It was the rational, cold disdain of a Southerner and a speculator.
ENGLISH   They did not even weep when Pépé covered their cold cheeks with kisses.
FRENCH   Au magasin, c\'était là leur préoccupation tyrannique, une lutte sans trêve ni pitié.
ENGLISH   A moment before too, Robineau had taken it into his head to trick Favier out of a customer.
FRENCH   Mais, parole d\'honneur! jamais plus désormais! Il faudrait être un fameux chenapan.
FRENCH   Il venait d\'apercevoir Bouthemont, il lui adressait un signe amical de la tête.
ENGLISH    \"I say,\" she asked of a little saleswoman who had joined that winter, \"are they going to give you a rise? You know that the second-hand is to have two thousand francs, which, with her commission, will bring her in nearly seven thousand.\"  The little saleswoman, without ceasing to pass some cloaks down, replied that if they didn\'t give her eight hundred francs she would take her hook.
ENGLISH   But I repeat, I cannot; my brothers expect me this evening.\"  She persisted in not understanding.
ENGLISH   No, no, it was not the governor who had sent him; and he finished by naming Clara--he simply wanted to talk about Clara.
FRENCH   Alors, Bouthemont intervint, pour sauver son chef.
ENGLISH   Only, in order to attain to this large amount, she would have to prove industrious and pushing, taking no notice of the ill-will displayed by those around her but fighting for her share and even snatching it from her comrades if necessary.
ENGLISH   He had a great horror of these explanations between women, whose asperity clashed with his perpetual desire for grace and refinement.
FRENCH   Tout d\'un coup, il cria:  -- Zut! je me fends d\'un supplément!...
FRENCH    Et il conclut, après un nouveau silence:  -- Ce que je m\'en fiche!  À ce moment, Denise traversait le rayon des soieries, en ralentissant sa marche et en regardant autour d\'elle, pour découvrir Robineau.
ENGLISH   When they told him it was striking eight, he seemed amazed.
ENGLISH   Was it not altogether an astonishing development? And it was already revolutionizing the markets and transforming Paris, for it was made of woman\'s flesh and blood.
FRENCH    Mais elle regretta cette parole, en apercevant les Baudu près d\'elle.
FRENCH   Oh! je leur accorde qu\'ils réussissent, mais c\'est tout.
ENGLISH   It was all too odious, nobody would believe it.
FRENCH   Il s\'était abandonné au fond d\'un fauteuil, et maintenant qu\'il pouvait raisonner, il se répandait en lamentations sur son propre compte.
FRENCH    -- Peut-être bien qu\'elle se remarie.
ENGLISH   Baudu, for his part, though his anger was written on his face, merely remarked: \"All is not gold that glitters.
ENGLISH   Of course they meet out of doors.\"  \"As for that, no, I assure you!\" exclaimed Denise, forgetting herself and carried away by the desire to give her cousin at least that consolation.
ENGLISH   Over the way, The Old Elbeuf, with its rusty front and lifeless windows, appeared to her so ugly and so wretched, thus viewed from amidst the luxury and life of her present standpoint, that a sort of remorse filled her already swollen heart with grief.
ENGLISH   You ought not to tempt these poor, defenceless women so.\"  This was the last word, which sounded like the supreme note of the day, in the growing fever that reigned in the establishment.
FRENCH   Toutes les voix donnaient ensemble, des voix aiguës, des voix grasses, les chiffres sifflaient dans l\'air, une clameur grésillante battait l\'immense nef, la clameur des forêts, en janvier, lorsque le vent souffle dans les branches.
FRENCH   Dès le rôti, un gigot bourgeois, il avait abordé la question, de sa voix blanche de Lyonnais, épaissie par les brouillards du Rhône.
FRENCH   À la porte, l\'inspecteur qui pointait l\'arrivée des employés, venait de refermer son registre et inscrivait à part les retardataires.
FRENCH    Mais un bruit, venu du corridor, la fit taire.
FRENCH   La frise du rez-de- chaussée déroulait des mosaïques, une guirlande de fleurs rouges et bleues, alternées avec des plaques de marbre, où étaient gravés des noms de marchandises, à l\'infini, ceignant le colosse.
FRENCH   Le mois passé, tandis que sa femme le croyait à Perpignan, il vivait à l\'hôtel, en compagnie d\'une maîtresse de piano, au fond d\'un quartier perdu.
ENGLISH   \"That one isn\'t born yet, my boy.
ENGLISH   Ah! poor child! It must be comical for those looking on to see such a string of bankrupts pass.
ENGLISH   Some one must stay here; oh! but only as a precaution, for to tell the truth----\"  Her gesture finished the phrase.
ENGLISH   There was real genius in his idea of presenting each buyer with a red air-ball made of fine gutta-percha and bearing in large letters the name of the establishment.
FRENCH   Lui, torturé, l\'écoutait, répétait avec passion:  -- Je veux...
ENGLISH   But you must sell, and I repeat my former question: Whom will you sell to? How do you hope to keep up such a colossal sale?\"  A loud exclamation, coming from the drawing-room, interrupted Mouret just as he began to reply.
ENGLISH   If the husband murders me it will be a good riddance for you.\" And as she was now crying as well, he became stricken with remorse.
ENGLISH   \"Once I\'m inside I could buy everything.\"  \"And this?\" asked Madame de Boves, taking up and examining some guipure.
FRENCH    Elle ne put retenir un geste de colère.
FRENCH   Une fois de plus, elle oublia Robineau, elle rentra directement au comptoir.
ENGLISH   The Old Elbeuf appeared lifeless, behind its murky windows.
ENGLISH   True, this ceremony had not prevented everything from being destroyed, but it had done as much good as a million francs worth of advertisements, so great an impression had it produced on the fashionable world.
ENGLISH    \"Well, we\'ve chatted enough, and must make room for the others,\" said the draper, giving the signal to rise from table.
FRENCH   Puis, elle resta stupéfaite lorsqu\'elle acquit la certitude que les regards ardents du commis s\'adressaient à Clara.
ENGLISH   drawing-room, the brasses and brocatel of which shone with a clear gaiety, she rose with an air of impatience, saying, \"Well?\"  \"Well,\" replied the young man, \"when I told him that I should no doubt call on you he formally promised me to come.\"  \"You made him thoroughly understand that I expected the baron to-day?\"  \"Certainly.
FRENCH   Elle poussa la porte, dont elle laissa les deux battants ouverts, et elle remit l\'éventail à une des quatre dames qui étaient assises au milieu de la pièce.
ENGLISH   They talked in a loud tone; it seemed as if The Ladies\' Paradise was at its last gasp.
FRENCH   Et, maintenant, les Baudu, immobiles, les bras tombés, suivaient du regard Mme Bourdelais, qui traversait la rue.
ENGLISH   Every one must sow his wild oats, and his head is generally clearer afterwards.
ENGLISH   Joseph had already received the silk behind the pay-desk, and was tying it up; and then the parcel, thrown into a basket on wheels, was sent down to the delivery department, which seemed to swallow up all the goods in the shop with a sluice-like roar.
FRENCH    -- À propos, demanda Henriette, qui voulait montrer une grande liberté d\'esprit, et ma protégée, qu\'en faites-vous, monsieur Mouret?...
ENGLISH   She has never had any affection except for one man; yes, for Monsieur Hutin, and even he has never noticed it!\"  The report of this quarrel, exaggerated and distorted, was already affording amusement to the whole shop when the story of Mouret\'s letter ran round.
ENGLISH    \"We ought all to jump into that hole,\" said Bourras to Denise, who had kept close to him.
FRENCH   M.
ENGLISH    But at this early hour very few people entered, a few customers pressed for time, housewives of the neighbourhood, women desirous of avoiding the afternoon crush.
ENGLISH   He will never know how to dress a woman who is in the least degree stylish.\"  Mouret did not defend his establishment, but still kept his eyes on her, consoling himself with the thought that she would never have dared to do what he had suspected.
FRENCH    C\'était une dame couperosée, avec un chapeau jaune et une robe rouge.
ENGLISH   Personally he felt he would be lost, if he did not get back into its good graces.
FRENCH   Ces demoiselles, débordées, lui laissèrent faire une vente importante; mais on était au mardi, il fallait attendre quatre jours, avant de toucher la semaine.
FRENCH    Alors, tandis que Marguerite débitait le manteau, Mme Marty tourna la tête; et, désignant Clara d\'un léger mouvement des paupières, elle dit très bas à Mme Desforges:  -- Vous savez, le caprice de M.
ENGLISH   The half stifled customers had pale faces with glittering eyes.
FRENCH   Le samedi soir, comme il donnait un dernier coup d\'oeil aux préparatifs de la grande vente du lundi, dont on s\'occupait depuis un mois, il avait eu la conscience soudaine que le classement des rayons adopté par lui, était inepte.
ENGLISH   Then Baudu, though still affecting to respect Denise\'s opinions, attempted to convert her.
ENGLISH   Thanks to the driver\'s energy, the omnibus had swerved, and thus only Robineau\'s legs had gone under the wheels; however, it was to be feared that they were both broken.
ENGLISH   She was the only one not invited.
ENGLISH   Madame Robineau herself, on seeing her husband deep in thought, glanced with approval at Denise, who had modestly resumed her silent attitude.
FRENCH   L\'aventure, qui depuis des mois, occupait les commis enchantés de la longue résistance de Denise, venait tout d\'un coup d\'aboutir à une crise: on avait appris la veille que la jeune fille quittait le Bonheur, malgré les supplications de Mouret, en prétextant un grand besoin de repos.
FRENCH   Mais elle entendit Mme Aurélie frapper à sa porte.
ENGLISH   And to crown all, on bringing Pépé to kiss his aunt and uncle, Denise\'s heart was rent by the gloomy sadness of The Old Elbeuf.
ENGLISH   Meantime a collar and a pair of cuffs were soaking in a basinful of soapsuds.
ENGLISH   For the past month moreover Bourdoncle\'s manner had completely changed; he now bent before Denise, and even secretly urged the governor on to a marriage with her.
FRENCH   L\'hôtel acheté à la rouleuse de coulisses, les sommes énormes mangées avec des filles ramassées dans les cabinets particuliers, l\'égayaient comme une excuse aux folies qu\'il avait faites lui-même autrefois.
ENGLISH   Her tongue refused its office, the intolerable burden of existence again fell on her shoulders.
ENGLISH   He had occupied his house since 1845, and had a thirty years\' lease of it at a rent of eighteen hundred francs a year; and, as he made a thousand francs out of his four furnished rooms, he only paid eight hundred for the shop.
FRENCH   Pourquoi ne pas s\'expliquer, montrer son frère? On allait encore s\'imaginer des vilenies; et elle aurait beau jurer, on ne la croirait pas.
FRENCH    -- Nous sommes rue de la Michodière, dit Jean, il doit loger par ici.
FRENCH    -- L\'argent n\'est pas pour elle.
FRENCH    -- Maintenant, reprit-elle, vite à mon lacet...
FRENCH   Dès lors, Mme Desforges, avec son flair délicat de femme jalouse, ne douta plus.
ENGLISH   Madame Robineau embraced Denise with an eagerness in which there was almost a feeling of joy at having at last got rid of all those worrying business matters.
FRENCH   Tenez! je vais faire les honneurs de chez vous.
FRENCH   Tant que je vivrai, la boutique restera telle que je l\'ai prise, avec ses quatre pièces d\'échantillon, à droite et à gauche, pas davantage!  L\'émotion gagnait toute la famille.
ENGLISH   When she at last ventured amongst the wheels she crossed the Place Gaillon, as if intending to take the Rue Louis-le-Grand; then altering her mind, she walked towards the Rue Saint-Roch.
ENGLISH   \"Well! those Lhommes may earn as much money as they like, I\'d rather be in my shoes than theirs.
ENGLISH   Then they got up and for some time the corridors were full of the confusion of the departure.
FRENCH   Tout un plan germait dans sa tête.
ENGLISH   She got up, and he, himself, drew back his chair with an instinctive movement, as if some one might have surprised them.
FRENCH    Pas un client n\'était venu déranger cette explication de famille.
ENGLISH   Thank you all the same, but I have found another situation.\"  He knew it, they had informed him she was with Robineau; and leisurely, putting himself on a footing of amiable equality, he spoke of the latter, rendering him full justice.
FRENCH    -- Nous en avons pour deux minutes, expliqua Baudu, pendant qu\'il descendait la rue Gaillon avec sa nièce.
FRENCH   Ce serait au contraire une chance pour mademoiselle...
FRENCH   Quelle imagination!  Il hochait la tête, il continuait de sourire, décidé à ne pas rendre confidence pour confidence.
FRENCH   Henriette réprima le tressaillement dont toute sa chair avait frémi.
FRENCH    -- En voilà une du Louvre, murmura Pauline dans la première salle, en regardant une grande fille mince qui mettait son manteau.
ENGLISH   It was she herself who, thinking to deprive The Ladies\' Paradise of his services offered to get him engaged by Bouthemont as first-hand in the silk department when The Four Seasons should start again.
FRENCH    -- Toujours des injustices! murmura furieusement Clara.
FRENCH   L\'attitude de Pauline avait changé, depuis que son amie était seconde aux confections.
ENGLISH   When he saw her so silent, he turned his anger against the people opposite, stretching out his fists towards the works, where they were that night setting up some large iron girders, with a great noise of hammers.
FRENCH   Bientôt les yeux de sa femme se fermèrent, elle dormait toute blanche, comme morte.
FRENCH   De grosses dames bousculaient le monde.
ENGLISH   It would fetch seven francs anywhere.\"  At this Mouret got angry.
FRENCH   Elle leva ses grands yeux purs sur cette dame qui la blessait ainsi et qu\'elle ne connaissait pas.
ENGLISH   But he was weary, the burden seemed to be too much for him, and entreaty almost pierced though his stammering accents.
FRENCH    -- Mais non, attendez-moi! cria l\'autre.
ENGLISH   \"Blanche, let\'s go away, we should be crushed.\"  But her voice failed her, she was gradually yielding to a desire to follow the others; and her fears dissolved before the irresistible attractions of the crush.
ENGLISH   No, look you, they can\'t be happy.\"  He was still keenly fretting over the sacrifice he had been compelled to make, full of rancour against those people who had bought up his darling dream.
ENGLISH   And now reprimands began to shower down on all sides like hail, and quite a storm burst in the gallery of the Rue de la Michodière.
FRENCH   Il venait rendre compte d\'une dernière démarche, dans laquelle du reste il avait échoué: la déclaration de faillite était définitive.
ENGLISH   Having at last got quite ashamed of his position he had left the three women to vegetate on the remnants of their fortune, and had accepted a petty appointment at the Ministry of the Interior, where he buried himself like a mole in his hole.
ENGLISH   Several seconds elapsed before Denise\'s eyes got sufficiently used to the light to distinguish the food on her plate.
FRENCH    Cependant, le rayon restait désert, peu de clientes montaient aux confections, à cette heure matinale.
FRENCH    -- Entendez-vous! continua-t-elle, Geneviève sait que vous en aimez une autre.
FRENCH   Hutin, et encore il ne s\'en est pas aperçu, il ne peut même pas se vanter de l\'avoir touchée du bout des doigts.
FRENCH   Entre derrière moi.
ENGLISH   \"At my uncle Baudu\'s, opposite.\"  At this, Mouret interfered a second time.
FRENCH   Sans doute elle savait qu\'il venait chez elle uniquement pour s\'y rencontrer avec le baron; mais il aurait pu ne pas lui jeter ainsi son indifférence à la face.
FRENCH   Parole d\'honneur! mon cher, si jamais je deviens second, vous verrez comme j\'agirai gentiment avec vous autres.
FRENCH   Les vendeuses des confections voisinaient surtout avec les vendeurs des dentelles, sans que l\'intimité forcée allât plus loin que des plaisanteries, échangées tout bas.
ENGLISH   Oh! you may say so, I quite understand it.
FRENCH   Puis, comme l\'autre continuait, disait que la petite descendait chaque nuit retrouver son amant, il l\'avait traité de menteur, fou de colère.
FRENCH   En face de lui, de l\'autre côté du bureau, Denise se tenait droite, sérieuse et pâle.
ENGLISH   He asked for no more money, but he arrived with such a melancholy countenance, that his anxious sister always managed to keep a five-franc piece for him.
ENGLISH   The counters disappeared beneath the whiteness of the silks, the ribbons, the gloves and the neckerchiefs.
ENGLISH   The first dinner was at five o\'clock.
ENGLISH   A slight flush had coloured Madame de Boves\'s cheeks, she was wild at the shifts to which she was put by her poverty; whilst Madame Marty, on the contrary, approved what was said, stricken with remorse on thinking of her poor husband.
FRENCH   Du reste, elle le grondait d\'aimer secrètement Denise, dont il n\'aurait jamais rien, et elle haussait les épaules, quand il approuvait la jeune fille de résister au patron.
ENGLISH   In the yellow light streaming down into the silk hall, ladies had taken off their gloves to feel the Paris Delight on which they commented in whispers.
FRENCH   Jamais encore il n\'avait eu une conscience si nette de la bataille engagée.
ENGLISH    \"Just look at him,\" added the young man, \"isn\'t he splendid, standing there before her with his dignified air? It\'s the old French gallantry, my dear fellow, the old French gallantry!\"  \"And your marriage?\" asked Mouret.
ENGLISH   Old Jouve is about the only one----\"  The other interrupted her.
ENGLISH    That night Denise slept but little.
ENGLISH   They even went beyond the fortifications, and sped through the suburbs; they were to be met in the hollow roads of Bicêtre and along the banks of the Marne, along even the shady drives of the Forest of Saint-Germain.
ENGLISH   But slowly her eyes grew dim, invaded by darkness; and when their last gleam had expired in death, they remained wide open, still gazing, and wet with tears.
FRENCH    -- Encore des volailles qui n\'ont que des pattes! fit remarquer Mignot.
ENGLISH   You know I\'m not in a much better position than you are.\"  They raised the stretcher; Robineau still found strength to say: \"No, no, stronger fellows than us would have given way as we have.
FRENCH   Vinçard, enflammé, éleva la voix.
ENGLISH   There they had cleared off everything, there was abundant room to pass, the hall was bare; the whole of the colossal stock of Paris Delight had been cut up and carried away, as if by a swarm of devouring locusts.
FRENCH   Lorsque le corps drapé de blanc traversa la place Gaillon, les regards sombres du cortège plongèrent une fois encore derrière les glaces du grand magasin, où seules deux vendeuses accourues regardaient, heureuses de cette distraction.
FRENCH   Mme Aurélie surtout se montrait bienveillante; Marguerite et Clara semblaient résignées; jusqu\'au père Jouve qui pliait l\'échine, l\'air embarrassé, comme désireux d\'effacer le vilain souvenir d\'autrefois.
FRENCH   Il aurait dû en rire, et cette attitude de fierté tendre achevait de lui bouleverser le coeur.
ENGLISH   Even in the train, just as she was leaving Valognes, she had been assailed by regrets and fears; and this was why she had left the box at the station and given the children their breakfast immediately on arriving in Paris.
FRENCH   D\'autres ne jurent que par le Bon Marché...
ENGLISH   She stopped on seeing him, and he went in that way, bowing to her with a ceremonious air.
ENGLISH   They still kept Mouret a close prisoner and overwhelmed him with fresh questions.
ENGLISH    Lhomme, with his head bowed down, again began writing.
ENGLISH   After the great sale his dismissal was certain.
ENGLISH   As for Colomban\'s surprise, however, it was not feigned; he had really never noticed Geneviève\'s slow agony.
ENGLISH   Thus it was a real disaster when Jean, with his love affairs, suddenly swooped down and pillaged her purse.
ENGLISH   As for finding ten francs on the morrow it was not to be thought of for a moment.
ENGLISH   This new application of the struggle-for-existence theory delighted Mouret; he had a real genius for administrative functions, and dreamed of so organizing the establishment as to trade upon the selfish instincts of his employees, for the greater satisfaction of his own appetites.
ENGLISH   Then he intimated that Madame Sauveur bought her material at his shop; no doubt she went to the manufacturers direct for certain designs of which she acquired the sole right of sale: but for black silks, for instance, she watched for The Paradise bargains, laying in a considerable stock, which she disposed of at double and treble the price she gave.
FRENCH   Mme Desforges, fille d\'un conseiller d\'État, était veuve d\'un homme de Bourse qui lui avait laissé une fortune, niée par les uns, exagérée par les autres.
ENGLISH   To think of it, a cold-natured fellow who had never known how to amuse a customer! It was exasperating.
FRENCH   Lui, songeait qu\'il avait offert à la jeune fille des soies, des velours, tout ce qu\'elle voudrait prendre à pleines mains, dans ces tas énormes, et qu\'elle avait refusé, d\'un petit signe de sa tête blonde.
FRENCH   En entrant, elle ne repoussa pas la porte, qui resta ouverte.
ENGLISH    \"Naturally I can\'t be very fond of them, cousin,\" replied Geneviève.
ENGLISH   Denise was just coming in, and he bowed to her with profound respect, his head swimming.
FRENCH    Denise ramena son oncle et son frère, dans une voiture de deuil.
FRENCH   Un instant, il souffla, pour retrouver la correction de sa tenue.
FRENCH   C\'était, d\'un bout à l\'autre des galeries, du haut en bas des étages, un piétinement d\'employés, des bras en l\'air, des paquets volant par-dessus les têtes; et cela au milieu d\'une tempête de cris, de chiffres lancés, dont la confusion montait et se brisait en un tapage assourdissant.
ENGLISH   \"Oh, my darling!--oh, my darling! my darling!\"  This was all she could say, and he, half choking, confessed himself, a prey to keen remorse now that he saw her kneeling thus before him.
FRENCH   Tout le rayon bâillait, sous les grands yeux somnolents de Mme Aurélie.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s all over, my dear fellow.
FRENCH   Pendant le congé de celui-ci, comme il le suppléait à titre de premier vendeur, il s\'était efforcé de lui nuire dans l\'esprit des chefs, de s\'installer à sa place, par des excès de zèle: c\'étaient de petites irrégularités découvertes et étalées, des projets d\'améliorations soumis, des dessins nouveaux qu\'il imaginait.
FRENCH   C\'était Bourras.
ENGLISH   Then when the letters had been distributed to the different departments and the latter had delivered the articles ordered, these articles were placed in the pigeon-holes as they arrived, in accordance with running numbers.
ENGLISH    \"Of course!\" muttered Hutin, consulting the bill of fare, written on a black-board above the wicket.
FRENCH    -- Écoutez, il est impossible que vous teniez le coup davantage, dit Pauline.
FRENCH   Vanpouille frères, les fourreurs, ne pouvaient tenir le coup...
ENGLISH    \"One hundred and forty francs,\" said Albert.
FRENCH   Quel joli travail!...
FRENCH   C\'était peut-être Marguerite, qu\'on accusait de se promener en chemise de nuit, pour moucharder le sommeil des autres.
FRENCH   Le chiffre courait.
ENGLISH    \"What! it\'s you, mademoiselle?\" said Mouret, whom Denise despite all her manœuvring found before her on the staircase, a small pocket-candleholder in his hand.
ENGLISH    \"If only it could crush them all,\" growled Bourras, in a savage voice.
FRENCH   Ça va tripler la vente, et comme mon seul intérêt est d\'arriver à de grosses recettes...
FRENCH    Justement, ce jour-là, Deloche parlait de Valognes.
FRENCH   Aussi répondit- elle, d\'un air d\'obligeance:  -- Bah! quand on s\'aime, on s\'entend toujours.
ENGLISH   Every sort of bad luck was pursuing her, for she had hoped to get her eighteen francs six sous through Robineau, who might perhaps be able to find the necktie-dealer; but Robineau, having got a fortnight\'s holiday, had not returned on the previous night though expected to do so.
ENGLISH    Moreover Denise did not confine her attention solely to the healing of the wounds from which she had herself bled; she conceived various delicate feminine ideas with which she prompted Mouret and which delighted the customers.
FRENCH   Cependant, elle se promettait de redescendre.
FRENCH    Denise, cependant, s\'était levée.
FRENCH   Tandis que, maintenant, son coeur battait d\'angoisse, sa vie était prise, il n\'avait plus l\'oubli du sommeil, dans son grand lit solitaire.
FRENCH   Ce fut là qu\'elle acheva de comprendre la puissance du nouveau commerce et de se passionner pour cette force qui transformait Paris.
FRENCH   Comment! la dame brune n\'achetait rien! son flair l\'avait donc trompé! Il abandonna Mme Marty, il insista auprès d\'Henriette, essaya sur elle sa puissance de bon vendeur.
ENGLISH   No doubt, when a man loved a woman he ought to marry her.
ENGLISH   Born in the old house, she loved each of its damp stones, living only for it and by it; and, formerly so proud of that house, the finest, the best patronised in the neighbourhood, she had had the daily grief of seeing the rival establishment gradually growing in importance, at first disdained, then equal to her own and finally towering above it, and threatening all.
ENGLISH   We can\'t keep them all this time doing nothing.\"  And if the manager hesitated, hardly knowing whom to sacrifice, he would continue: \"Make your own arrangements, six salesmen must suffice; you can take on others in October, there are always plenty to be had!\"  Moreover Bourdoncle undertook the executions.
ENGLISH    \"Famous!\" he cried, feeling the silk.
ENGLISH   They had finished their meal and were lolling back on their chairs waiting for the bell to recall them to work.
FRENCH    Cette réflexion ramena ces messieurs à l\'inventaire.
ENGLISH   What was the good of working so much if money could not procure everything? He would precious soon have shut up shop and have given up work on the day he found that his millions could not even win him the woman he loved! Mouret, as he listened became grave.
FRENCH   Deux fois, elle s\'était trouvée en face de Pauline, qui lui avait offert ses services, désolée de la savoir malheureuse; même il lui avait fallu mentir, pour éviter de recevoir son amie ou d\'aller lui rendre visite, un dimanche, chez Baugé.
ENGLISH    \"Come,\" he would say, \"you must have some who don\'t suit you.
ENGLISH   At each footstep his heart beat.
ENGLISH   Whilst two messengers carried the chair up to the second floor, Madame Marty purchased six ivory studs, some silk mice, and a lacquered match-box.
FRENCH   C\'était peu, il n\'avait pas de frais, il pouvait tenir longtemps encore.
ENGLISH   He shook his head, and waited, feeling more and more perturbed, and fancying that he could guess what the governor was aiming at.
ENGLISH   Clara, greatly annoyed by the sight of this abundant hair, affected to laugh at it, so strange did it look, twisted up anyhow with savage grace.
FRENCH   Aussi, lorsque le second reparut, le grognement fut-il général.
FRENCH    Elle n\'eut pas un geste, elle dit seulement:  -- Notre fille en mourra.
FRENCH   Marguerite risqua un léger gloussement de fille distinguée qui se retient; Clara avait lâché une vente, pour se faire du bon sang à son aise; même des vendeuses de la lingerie étaient venues, attirées par la rumeur.
ENGLISH    \"Pitch \'em in, the sawbones!\"  \"Duck \'em, the counter-jumpers!\"  In the evening they returned to the restaurant on the island.
FRENCH   Un simple mur séparait sa chambre de son ancien rayon; et, dès le matin, elle recommençait ses journées, elle sentait monter la foule, avec le ronflement plus large de la vente.
FRENCH   J\'ai mal dormi, voilà tout.
FRENCH   Enfin, ce fut Mme Aurélie elle même qui l\'aperçut et qui, s\'étonnant de la voir immobile, lui demanda ce qu\'elle désirait.
FRENCH   Denise eut un léger frisson en entrant, les épaules saisies par la fraîcheur qui tombait des murs.
FRENCH    Mais il était trop tard, Geneviève devait avoir entendu.
FRENCH    Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
ENGLISH   The deuce! Colomban would always be there, no one would run away with him!  \"It\'s incredible!\" he repeated; \"such a well-trained girl!\"  Madame Baudu said no more.
ENGLISH   To the right and the left of the large glazed gallery, other galleries and other halls were glistening in the sunshine, between the housetops, pierced with garret windows and running along symmetrically, like the wings of a barracks.
FRENCH   Puis, quand elle en eut assez:  -- Oh! mon Dieu! la première est encore la meilleure.
ENGLISH   A compact crowd of heads was surging under the galleries and expanding like an overflowing river in the middle of the hall.
ENGLISH    \"A nice thing to shut people up on such a fine Sunday as this!\" repeated Favier.
FRENCH   Clara, très ennuyée par ces cheveux, affectait d\'en rire, tellement ils étaient noués de travers, dans leur grâce sauvage.
FRENCH   Ses jambes gardaient un tremblement.
FRENCH    -- Hein! les entendez-vous? criait-il.
FRENCH    Cependant, elle n\'avait point osé jusque-là se risquer dans le hall des soieries, dont le haut plafond vitré, les comptoirs luxueux, l\'air d\'église lui faisaient peur.
ENGLISH   Every one was yawning even under Madame Aurélie\'s big sleepy eyes.
ENGLISH   At the distributing counter they were just starting on the fortieth thousand: thirty nine thousand red air-balls had already taken flight in the warm atmosphere of the shop, a perfect cloud of red air-balls which were now floating from one end of Paris to the other, bearing upwards to the sky the name of The Ladies\' Paradise!  Five o\'clock struck.
ENGLISH   She did not wish to be taken in by them, she preferred to profit by their real bargains.
ENGLISH   She, however, stung with jealousy, concealing her wounded feelings beneath an appearance of disdain, had that afternoon come to try and discover her rival, a young lady in the mantle department, so Bouthemont had told her, though declining to give the name.
ENGLISH    \"You really make a mistake, madame,\" said Clara; \"the shoulders fit perfectly--but perhaps you would prefer a pelisse to a mantle?\"  Just then Denise started.
ENGLISH   Since he had caught sight of Denise and Madame Desforges coming up the grand staircase, he had been talking louder, gesticulating against his will; and though he affected not to turn his face towards them, he grew more and more animated as he felt them drawing nearer.
ENGLISH   A hot-house heat, moist and close, laden with the insipid odour of the materials, and muffling the tramping of the crowd, prevailed in the galleries.
ENGLISH   And her old fear, the shiver which chilled her whenever she was in his presence, suddenly developed into an ardent desire to see him, not to leave the house in fact without telling him that she had never belonged to another.
ENGLISH   If the girl\'s hands still trembled somewhat, at being treated in this way before his face, she nevertheless accepted the necessities of her position with the proud resignation of one who was courageous.
ENGLISH    \"No, no; let me be,\" stammered Denise.
FRENCH   Pour sûr, il se passait quelque histoire.
FRENCH   Mais la dernière vitrine surtout les retint.
ENGLISH   There\'s no reason to cry.\" And thereupon she hastened back to her department.
FRENCH   Cependant, elle n\'avait pas voulu ces choses, elle s\'était simplement présentée, sans calcul, avec l\'unique charme de la douceur.
FRENCH   Il est notre coup de fortune, c\'est lui qui va nous sauver et qui nous lancera.
FRENCH   Ce qu\'elle en avait dit, c\'était par bonté de coeur, car elle éprouvait un véritable chagrin de voir si malheureuse une camarade.
ENGLISH   Mouret had ceased to pay any attention to Clara; whilst as for that other lady friend of his, Madame Desforges, it was probably all but so much gossip.
ENGLISH   Ugly! and now she could have brought him to his knees by a look, for he thought her nothing less than an angel! Then she had remained the last in the house, repulsed, joked at, treated by him as a curious specimen of humanity.
FRENCH    Il parlait de Denise.
FRENCH   Mais, depuis quelques minutes, sans cesser de parler, il suivait du regard le travail de Hutin, qui s\'attardait à mettre des soies bleues à côté de soies grises et de soies jaunes, puis qui se reculait, pour juger de l\'harmonie des tons.
ENGLISH   \"I\'ve just come to fetch this fan to show them,\" and so saying she playfully tapped him on the face with the tip of the fan she held.
ENGLISH   You\'ll all go.
ENGLISH   He had dreamt of some such orderly arrangement in the old days of Madame Hédouin\'s narrow shop; but now, just as he had carried out his idea, he felt his faith shaken.
ENGLISH   Hutin and he, so friendly in the shop, bowed to each other at the door, where all further intercourse between them ceased.
ENGLISH   On the threshold of the umbrella shop, old Bourras, hairy and bearded like a prophet, and with spectacles on his nose, stood studying the ivory handle of a walking-stick.
FRENCH   Il en sculptait surtout la pomme avec une fantaisie charmante, renouvelant toujours les sujets, des fleurs, des fruits, des animaux, des têtes, traités d\'une façon vivante et libre.
FRENCH   Elle s\'égayait des souffles brusques qui rabattaient la nappe, elle trouvait drôle la tonnelle, nue encore, avec son treillage repeint, dont les losanges se découpaient sur le couvert.
ENGLISH    One evening, after dinner, while the young ladies were setting the cupboards in order, Joseph came to inform Denise that a young man wanted her below.
ENGLISH   To physical martyrdom was added the secret persecutions of her comrades.
FRENCH   De telles histoires remuaient Denise, elle était reprise devant lui de ses peurs d\'autrefois, d\'un malaise où sa reconnaissance luttait contre de la colère.
FRENCH   Henriette s\'était tournée vers le baron Hartmann.
FRENCH   Tout lui devenait prétexte pour déblayer le plancher.
FRENCH   Les embellissements qu\'il y avait faits, les peintures vert tendre, les glaces, l\'enseigne dorée, tout craquait, se salissait déjà, offrait cette décrépitude rapide et lamentable du faux luxe, badigeonné sur des ruines.
ENGLISH    Then, turning round, Denise again found the Baudus behind her.
FRENCH    -- Elle était là? demanda-t-elle en refermant la porte.
FRENCH   Puis, il attaqua le sujet, qui lui tenait au coeur, il parla de la nouvelle voie, du prolongement de la rue Réaumur, dont on allait ouvrir une section, sous le nom de rue du Dix-Décembre, entre la place de la Bourse et la place de l\'Opéra.
FRENCH    -- Sais-tu à quoi je pense, Élisabeth? dit-il enfin.
FRENCH   Rue de la Michodière, il allait rentrer chez lui, lorsqu\'un boutiquier voisin, debout sur la porte, l\'appela d\'un signe.
FRENCH   Maintenant, elle le repousserait, elle le renverrait à cette femme, qui ne cachait même pas sa liaison devant les étrangers.
FRENCH   Les autres vendeurs du rayon étaient en train d\'empiler des pièces de Paris-Bonheur, sous les ordres de Robineau; tandis que Bouthemont, en grande conférence avec une jeune femme maigre, paraissait prendre à demi-voix une commande importante.
ENGLISH   When she is sleeping, she seems to us to be all right again.\"  Again did silence fall.
FRENCH    La comtesse avait lancé un vif regard à sa nouvelle amie.
ENGLISH   She was passionately fond of children, and could not have been placed in a better position.
ENGLISH   Space had been gained everywhere; light and air entered freely, and the public circulated with the greatest ease under the bold flights of the far-stretching girders.
FRENCH    Elle l\'arrêta de la main, ne pouvant plus elle-même cacher son trouble, profondément remuée par cette passion souffrante.
FRENCH   Mais vous étiez à Valognes! ...
FRENCH   Il paraît que, demain, on vous offrira quatre-vingt mille francs...
ENGLISH   As he hurried up he overtook Deloche and Liénard who had gone on before him, so he fell back on Mignot who was following at his heels.
FRENCH   Il avait fermé les yeux à demi, dans une pose de fatigue et de dédain, où une pointe d\'affectation s\'ajoutait au réel épuisement de sa race.
FRENCH    Et, nerveusement, enchanté d\'avoir un sujet, il donnait des détails intarissables, racontait des faits, en tirait un classement.
ENGLISH   On the previous evening she had been told that she was accepted as a probationer, that is to say, without any fixed salary; she would simply have the commission and allowance on what she sold.
ENGLISH    \"You have twenty-two days, mademoiselle,\" said the clerk, \"that makes eighteen francs and fourteen sous; to which must be added seven francs for commission.
FRENCH    -- Ah! ce vieux Paul, toujours le même, toujours paradoxal!...
FRENCH   de Boves, debout derrière elles, se penchait par instants, disait un mot avec sa galanterie de beau fonctionnaire.
FRENCH    Elle le suivit, ils descendirent deux étages, traversèrent les rayons des meubles et des tapis, sans dire un mot.
FRENCH   Autour d\'elle, les propositions glapissaient, s\'enfiévraient encore.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, finit-elle par dire, j\'ai promis à mon petit monde de lui montrer des images, là-haut, dans le salon...
FRENCH   Dans un premier essayage, elle avait posé des épingles aux épaules, qui n\'allaient pas.
FRENCH   Vous m\'installerez sur une chaise, je travaillerai aux écritures.
FRENCH   Dans le quartier, on hochait la tête: la pauvre dame ne s\'ennuierait pas longtemps de sa fille.
FRENCH    -- Monsieur Bourras, dit doucement Denise.
FRENCH   J\'ignorais si je l\'aimais, j\'étais sa femme, voilà tout...
FRENCH   Demain?  Cette simple question troubla Denise.
ENGLISH   She waved her hands despairingly and was evidently admitting that things were bad.
ENGLISH   \"But look here,\" he resumed; \"you who know the business, do you think it right that a simple draper\'s shop should sell everything? Formerly, when trade was trade, drapers sold nothing but drapery.
ENGLISH   I\'ll have the money taken to the central cashier\'s office.
ENGLISH    \"I must be off,\" said Denise.
ENGLISH   He leant over, and politely murmured in the countess\'s ear,  \"Have the kindness to follow me, madame.\"  For a moment she revolted: \"But what for, sir?\"  \"Have the kindness to follow me, madame,\" repeated the inspector, without raising his voice.
FRENCH   Qu\'avait donc la mal peignée, ce jour-là? Elle était toute singulière.
FRENCH    Elle s\'interrompit, étonnée de sentir une main se poser sur son épaule.
FRENCH   Et son tourment le rendit terrible, la maison entière trembla.
ENGLISH   Then she gave the six chemises; and, Jean having said that he must next go to the handkerchief counter, she called an auxiliary to carry both the chemises and the jacket left by the auxiliary from the mantle department.
FRENCH   Maintenant, par les fenêtres vides, on voyait l\'intérieur, les chambres misérables, l\'escalier noir, où le soleil n\'avait pas pénétré depuis deux cents ans.
ENGLISH   Mouret, who was about to answer in his turn, started slightly, and both he and his companions turned round.
FRENCH   Embrassez-moi bien, c\'est la dernière fois.
ENGLISH    \"He has invited her to dinner, my dear fellow,\" said Favier to his right-hand neighbour, finishing his story.
FRENCH   Sans répondre, Denise se mit à les trier, à les plier avec soin et à les classer de nouveau dans les armoires.
FRENCH   Et tu me tourmentes chaque semaine, je me tue à t\'entretenir de pièces de cent sous.
ENGLISH   Without replying, Denise began to sort and fold them carefully and arrange them again in the cupboards.
ENGLISH   From one end of the galleries to the other, from the top to the bottom floor, there was a continual tramping of employees; arms were ever being raised and parcels were flying about above their heads; and all this amidst a tempest of shouts and calling out of figures, ascending in confusion and becoming a deafening roar.
FRENCH   Puis, elle déclara:  -- Mon Dieu! je veux bien vous inscrire.
ENGLISH   He was a very intelligent fellow, no doubt, but too nervous.
FRENCH    -- Mais jamais le Vieil Elbeuf ne fera une concession!...
FRENCH   Une agitation de chantier emplissait ce fond de cave, ce sous-sol où des piliers de fonte soutenaient les voûtins, et dont les murs nus étaient cimentés.
ENGLISH   My lease has twelve years to run yet.
ENGLISH   Baron Hartmann\'s financial dilettantism in putting money into both concerns, annoyed him also.
FRENCH   Pourtant, trois dames se présentèrent, Denise resta seule un instant.
FRENCH    Cependant, derrière ces dames, au milieu des bousculades de la vente, les commérages du rayon continuaient sur Mme Frédéric.
FRENCH   C\'était un pêle-mêle de dames vêtues de soie, de petites-bourgeoises à robes pauvres, de filles en cheveux, toutes soulevées, enfiévrées de la même passion.
ENGLISH    \"We must talk it over to-night,\" whispered Henriette on returning to Bouthemont.
ENGLISH   \"What! you love him?\" And, after a pause, she asked: \"So it\'s all to make him marry you?\"  But at this, the young girl sprang up, quite confused: \"Marry me! Oh, no! Oh! I assure you that I have never wished for anything of the kind! No, never has such an idea entered my head; and you know what a horror I have of all falsehood!\"  \"Well, dear,\" resumed Pauline, kindly, \"you couldn\'t have acted otherwise, if such had been your intention.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle, for his part, exercised a general surveillance.
ENGLISH   This young lady, already twenty-eight years old, and thin and pale, was a _protégée_ of Madame Desforges, who had wanted Mouret to engage her as a saleswoman, backing up her recommendation with a touching story: An orphan, the last of the Fontenailles, an old and noble family of Poitou, had been thrown on to the streets of Paris with a drunken father; still she had remained virtuous amidst this misfortune which was the greater as her education was altogether too limited to enable her to secure employment as governess or music-mistress.
ENGLISH   In the gaps of the iron framework, up the staircases, on the hanging bridges, there was an endless ascent of small figures which looked as if lost amidst the snowy peaks of mountains.
FRENCH   Mme Bourdelais, Mme Guibal, Blanche elle-même, voulaient savoir.
ENGLISH   mansion; you could hardly conceive how it had sprung up in the narrow slit where its two low dumpy storeys displayed themselves.
FRENCH   Et, comme ils restaient froids, bronzés par l\'habitude, elle s\'assit tout d\'un coup, écrivit d\'une main tremblante.
FRENCH   Les commis, indifférents, ne riaient même plus.
FRENCH   On lui trouverait bien une place dans le quartier.
ENGLISH   Really, I don\'t know where Monsieur Hutin picks them up, but they\'re an ugly, dirty lot.\"  Denise had turned pale, and felt an icy coldness, as if her heart\'s blood were flowing away, drop by drop.
FRENCH    Au milieu du rayon, une exposition des soieries d\'été éclairait le hall d\'un éclat d\'aurore, comme un lever d\'astre dans les teintes les plus délicates de la lumière, le rose pâle, le jaune tendre, le bleu limpide, toute l\'écharpe flottante d\'Iris.
FRENCH   Elle finit par l\'apercevoir devant la boutique de Bourras, où elle le rejoignit pour lui recommander de marcher près de l\'oncle et de le soutenir, s\'il avait de la peine à marcher.
FRENCH   Moi, il n\'y a qu\'une chose que je ne lui pardonne pas, c\'est d\'avoir poussé à ce mariage, vous savez? ce Joseph, avec ma protégée, Mlle de Fontenailles...
FRENCH   Sa première idée était de chasser Hutin et Deloche; puis, il avait réfléchi que, s\'il ne les gardait pas, il ne saurait jamais rien; et les autres payaient pour eux, le personnel entier craquait.
FRENCH    -- Est-il au courant? reprit-il.
FRENCH   On l\'occupait au déplié depuis le matin, on ne lui avait abandonné que quelques ventes douteuses, qu\'elle avait manquées d\'ailleurs.
FRENCH   N\'avez-vous donc pas de besoins? Vos frères sont une lourde charge.
FRENCH   La femme se rhabillait, le flot blanc de cette tombée de linge rentrait dans le mystère frissonnant des jupes, la chemise raidie par les doigts de la couturière, le pantalon froid et gardant les plis du carton, toute cette percale et toute cette batiste mortes, éparses sur les comptoirs, jetées, empilées, allaient se faire vivantes de la vie de la chair, odorantes et chaudes de l\'odeur de l\'amour, une nuée blanche devenue sacrée, baignée de nuit, et dont le moindre envolement, l\'éclair rose du genou aperçu au fond des blancheurs, ravageait le monde.
FRENCH   Albert, là-bas?  C\'était, en effet, le jeune Lhomme, au milieu de trois femmes équivoques, une vieille dame en chapeau jaune, à mine basse de pourvoyeuse, et deux mineures, deux fillettes de treize ou quatorze ans, déhanchées, d\'une effronterie gênante.
ENGLISH   \"Take care, it will bite you!\" he said, \"there, go and play, and don\'t break it, if you can help it.\" Then speedily reverting to his fixed idea, he shook his fist at the wall.
ENGLISH   Had he not scores of times proclaimed the nothingness of life, in which wrong-doing alone had any attraction? And by way of diversion Mouret amused himself for a minute, by preaching indifference to his friend, in a friendly, bantering tone.
FRENCH    II   Le lendemain, à sept heures et demie, Denise était devant le Bonheur des Dames.
ENGLISH   However, he at last made up his mind, and gently inquired: \"Was it really necessary to upset everything like that, on the eve of our sale?\"  At first Mouret shrugged his shoulders without replying.
FRENCH    XII   Ce fut le 25 septembre que commencèrent les travaux de la nouvelle façade du Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH   Du reste, il lui tendait des pièges plus savants, il l\'analysait en grand moraliste.
FRENCH    Déjà Pauline et Baugé marchaient devant.
ENGLISH   When she had interrogated him by a sign, the servant leant over and said in a very low tone:  \"It\'s for that mantle.
FRENCH    Mme de Boves restait dédaigneuse.
FRENCH   La crise finira Dieu sait comment!  -- C\'est odieux! conclut Robineau, que ce cri de colère soulagea.
ENGLISH   At last, Madame Aurélie herself perceived her, and astonished to see her standing there motionless inquired what she wanted.
FRENCH   Tout de suite, Denise ôta la mince robe de laine, usée par la brosse, raccommodée aux manches, la seule qu\'elle eût apportée de Valognes.
FRENCH    -- Je ne voulais pas vous offenser, répétait Deloche que les larmes gagnaient.
ENGLISH   And then he ran away, unable to find a word of satisfaction, fearful lest he should display his tears, and leaving behind him the disgust of triumph.
FRENCH   Donc, un matin, comme Mouret traversait la soie, il s\'arrêta, surpris de voir Favier en train de modifier les étiquettes de tout un solde de velours noir.
FRENCH   Mais je n\'ai pas voulu, vous voyez bien que je vous parle ici, où chacun peut entrer...
ENGLISH   Then when she did venture in, to escape the shopmen of the linen department, who were grinning at her, she stumbled right on Mouret\'s display; and, despite her bewilderment, the woman was aroused within her, her cheeks suddenly flushed, and she forgot everything in looking at the glow of this conflagration of silk.
FRENCH    -- Je sais, je sais...
FRENCH    -- Tenez! rentrez donc ça derrière l\'oreille...
ENGLISH   As she often said, what was the use of it all? Would it not be better to live quietly in some small lodging, and be contented with modest fare?  \"My dear child,\" she resumed with her pretty smile, which was becoming sadder, \"we have nothing to conceal from you.
ENGLISH   At the same time, however, as the hotel was only to occupy a certain frontage, the baron might also have entertained Mouret\'s idea, and have treated for the rest of the block of houses, which still represented a vast surface.
FRENCH    -- Ah bien! reprit-elle après un silence, en voilà un magasin!  C\'était, à l\'encoignure de la rue de la Michodière et de la rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, un magasin de nouveautés dont les étalages éclataient en notes vives, dans la douce et pâle journée d\'octobre.
ENGLISH   The men changed their plates themselves, and the piles at both ends were diminishing.
ENGLISH    \"Monsieur Albert,\" said Bourdoncle, severely, \"you have again taken an address wrong; the parcel has come back.
FRENCH   Et, après avoir reconnu Mouret, elle s\'était de nouveau penchée sur ses feuilles, simplement.
ENGLISH    \"Always plunged in dress!\" he murmured, with a smile; and like a friend of the house, he ventured to add: \"There\'s a charming young person in the ante-room.
FRENCH   Justement, je l\'ai vu ce matin, il m\'a formellement promis...
FRENCH   Quand il aurait tiré d\'elles sa fortune et son plaisir, il les jetterait en tas à la borne, pour ceux qui pourraient encore y trouver leur vie.
ENGLISH    And then he tried to change the conversation, speaking of the fêtes that were being given to the King of Prussia who had arrived in Paris the day before.
ENGLISH   She had always yielded thus to the first outburst of her sensitiveness: tears suffocated her, and passion increased her torments: but then she regained her self-command, a grand, calm courage, a quiet but inexorable strength of will.
ENGLISH   There are numbers who are so, I assure you.\"  Denise had involuntarily raised her eyes towards Madame Hédouin\'s portrait; that lady so sensible and so beautiful, whose blood, they said, had brought good fortune to the house.
ENGLISH    But realising that her voice was softening, he attacked her with greater energy than ever, holding the embroidered gloves before her eyes; and she could not resist, she bought a pair.
ENGLISH   The uproar of the voices beat upon the walls with such force that the bell was at first only heard by those at the tables near the door.
FRENCH    Alors, Denise eut la sensation d\'une machine, fonctionnant à haute pression, et dont le branle aurait gagné jusqu\'aux étalages.
FRENCH   En bas, enfin, l\'exposition de blanc prenait, au fond des vitrines, une intensité de ton aveuglante.
ENGLISH   When he did not move he only felt the burning weight of his legs.
FRENCH   Dans la petite chambre glacée, toutes deux se souriaient, émues de cette conversation à voix basse.
FRENCH    L\'autre l\'interrompit.
ENGLISH   When he espied Denise watching him he blushed and turned away his head, as if afraid that she might betray him to Geneviève, although there had been no further connection between the Baudus and their niece since her engagement at The Ladies\' Paradise.
ENGLISH   And as they, however, remained quite unmoved, hardened by custom, she all at once sat down and began to write with a trembling hand.
ENGLISH   The exasperated Baudus now had to give up the idea of sleeping even; they were shaken in their alcove; the noises changed into nightmare whenever they managed to doze off.
FRENCH   Née au Vieil Elbeuf, elle en aimait jusqu\'aux pierres humides, elle ne vivait que pour lui et par lui; et, autrefois glorieuse de cette maison, la plus forte, la plus richement achalandée du quartier, elle avait eu la continuelle souffrance de voir grandir peu à peu la maison rivale, d\'abord dédaignée, puis égale en importance, puis débordante, menaçante.
FRENCH   Hutin, qui savait ces choses, au lieu de gifler son ancien camarade, le regardait maintenant comme très fort.
FRENCH   La manifestation tournait à l\'émeute; et, lorsque, après le service, le convoi se remit en marche, tous les hommes suivirent de nouveau, bien qu\'il y eût une longue course, de la rue Saint-Honoré au cimetière Montmartre.
FRENCH   de Vallagnosc.
ENGLISH    And at this last moment, in this over-heated atmosphere, the women reigned supreme.
ENGLISH   He had paid forty thousand for the good-will and stock, and was starting with the remaining twenty thousand.
FRENCH    Il était hors de lui, il se battait tout seul, au milieu de la boutique, avec des gestes si désordonnés, qu\'il menaçait d\'enfoncer les vitrines.
ENGLISH   His face was regaining its colour, his faith was coming back and increasing at sight of the crowd which was gradually filling the place.
FRENCH   Elle sentait l\'injure.
ENGLISH   Then, drawing up closer, he related that he had made a hundred and fifteen francs that week; oh! a capital week.
FRENCH   Seuls, les habitants du quartier, les petits commerçants surtout, remués par un tel déploiement de banderoles et de panaches, formaient des groupes, sous les portes, aux coins des trottoirs, le nez levé, pleins de remarques amères.
FRENCH   Maintenant, ces dames étaient prises du besoin curieux de voir ce que Mme Marty avait acheté.
ENGLISH   But on Sunday I shall expect you; you can spend the afternoon with me.\"  The next morning, at six o\'clock, Geneviève expired after four hours\' fearful agony.
FRENCH   En outre, pour trouver des capitaux, il s\'est avisé de décider la plupart de ses employés à placer leur argent chez lui.
FRENCH   Mais elle se sentait sans rancune, aujourd\'hui qu\'il souffrait par elle.
FRENCH   À la mercerie, à la ganterie, elle faillit enjamber encore des garçons de service, et elle se crut seulement sauvée, lorsqu\'elle trouva enfin l\'escalier.
FRENCH   En parlant, ses yeux faisaient le tour de la petite pièce; et un tremblement le prenait, à l\'idée inavouée que les sauvages pourraient un jour, s\'ils achevaient de tuer sa maison, le déloger de ce trou où il avait chaud, entre sa femme et sa fille.
FRENCH    On avait fini, on se leva.
ENGLISH   But they complained of never having had any luck.
FRENCH   Certainement, les maîtresses de ses amis, des filles de boutique, ne se permettaient pas de confidences plus complètes.
FRENCH    Elle le fit taire de nouveau, elle se fâcha, torturée, poussée à bout.
FRENCH    -- Comment la nourriture n\'est pas bonne? demanda d\'un air naïf Mouret, ouvrant enfin la bouche.
FRENCH   Sans doute, pendant la partie de Rambouillet, ces demoiselles avaient monté la tête de Mme Aurélie, car cette dernière la traitait depuis lors d\'un air de sévérité, où il entrait comme une rancune.
FRENCH    Vers deux heures, un piquet d\'ordre dut faire circuler la foule et veiller au stationnement des voitures.
ENGLISH    When Madame Aurélie, who went to the first dinner, came back from the dining-room, she announced the amount of business done during the year, which the totals of the various departments had just enabled one to arrive at.
FRENCH    Le caissier répondit:  -- Quatre-vingt mille sept cent quarante-deux francs dix centimes!  Un rire de jouissance souleva le Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH   Tout le linge de la femme, les dessous blancs qui se cachent, s\'étalait dans une suite de salles, classé en divers rayons.
ENGLISH    \"Well! I can\'t go on like this for ever,\" said Vallagnosc, with a weary movement of the eyelids.
FRENCH   Une dernière clarté luisait au flanc de la théière, une lueur courte et vive de veilleuse, qui aurait brûlé dans une alcôve attiédie par le parfum du thé.
FRENCH   Ils ne pleurèrent même pas, lorsque Pépé mit de gros baisers sur leurs joues froides.
FRENCH    -- Hein? murmura-t-il crûment, on la ganterait jusqu\'au bout!  Cependant, Mme Desforges continuait ses achats.
ENGLISH    \"Well!\" the latter began, \"we had a board-meeting yesterday, and I came to-day, thinking I should meet you, and wishing to keep you informed.
FRENCH   La vie intime des vendeuses y prenait des propretés et des élégances, une pose pour les savons chers et les linges fins, toute une montée naturelle vers la bourgeoisie, à mesure que leur sort s\'améliorait; bien qu\'on entendît encore voler des gros mots et les portes battre, dans le coup de vent d\'hôtel garni qui les emportait matin et soir.
ENGLISH   But you, my girl, you are not eating.
FRENCH   Quand l\'avoué m\'a dit devant Gaujean que les affiches seraient posées demain, il m\'a semblé que des flammes dansaient, comme si les murs avaient brûlé...
FRENCH   Ces salons étaient d\'étroites cellules, fermées de glaces dépolies, et où les hommes, même les maris, ne pouvaient entrer, par une exagération décente de la direction.
FRENCH   Maintenant, c\'est fini, je suis à vous.
FRENCH   Le spécimen du cahier fut approuvé: en haut, sur la souche et sur la note à détacher, se trouvaient l\'indication du rayon et le numéro du vendeur; puis, répétées également des deux côtés, il y avait des colonnes pour le métrage, la désignation des articles, les prix; et le vendeur signait simplement la note, avant de la remettre au caissier.
ENGLISH    That night Denise did not sleep much.
FRENCH    Toutes deux se turent.
FRENCH   Je ne sais ce qu\'il a, ce vieux, à rire, quand il nous voit ensemble...
FRENCH   Souvent, Dumonteil ne gagne pas vingt centimes.
ENGLISH   No doubt it was the lady of whom people had spoken to her, the lady with whom Mouret\'s name was so often associated.
FRENCH   Mais cela les remuait trop, ils rentraient distraits, l\'esprit détourné de la vente; et la direction avait décidé qu\'ils ne sortiraient plus, qu\'ils paieraient trois sous de supplément, pour une tasse de café, s\'ils en voulaient.
ENGLISH   For weeks he had been anxious, agitated by a nervous torment that he did not always manage to conceal; and his triumph brought a respite, a distraction to his suffering.
FRENCH   Nous les avons en plusieurs couleurs.
ENGLISH   \"I assure you that all these wicked reports are untrue.
ENGLISH   It then became four million francs, which, turned over ten times, produced business to the extent of forty millions.
FRENCH    Une surprise immobilisa ces dames.
FRENCH   Le poids devenait trop lourd, les pieds de derrière menaçaient de casser; et il était convenu que tous les achats seraient centralisés à une caisse, pour être descendus ensuite au service du départ.
ENGLISH   Slowly, perspiring and puffing, he had come from the other end of the shop amidst the growing emotion of the salesmen.
FRENCH   Faites de moi ce qu\'il vous plaira.
FRENCH    Et tous deux, tenant leurs assiettes, entrèrent dans le réfectoire, après avoir pris leur part de vin à la buvette; pendant que, derrière leur dos, le mot «poulet» tombait sans relâche, régulièrement, et qu\'on entendait la fourchette du cuisinier piquer les morceaux, avec un petit bruit rapide et cadencé.
ENGLISH   Then suddenly she stammered: \"I don\'t know; they don\'t tell me anything.
ENGLISH   I was at Crevecœur\'s in the Rue du Mail.\"  They were once more standing face to face; and, not knowing how to take leave, they again began to blush.
ENGLISH   It was a quarter to ten, the first lunch-bell had rung.
ENGLISH   Henriette meanwhile remained silent and thoughtful, divided between the desire to let Denise remain forgotten in the ante-room, and the fear that Mouret, now aware of her presence, might go away.
FRENCH   Quand une camarade risquait une nouvelle allusion, elle se contentait de la regarder fixement, d\'un air triste et calme.
FRENCH   Et la jeune fille devait parfois répondre par un sourire au signe de tête amical dont la saluait Pauline, que Baugé attendait régulièrement dès huit heures et demie, debout à l\'angle de la fontaine Gaillon.
FRENCH   On parla ensuite d\'une pièce de la Gaieté, où des amours de petites filles dansaient mieux que des grandes personnes.
ENGLISH   The department had been turned into a white temple; tulles and guipures, falling from above, formed a white sky, one of those cloudy veils whose fine network pales the morning sun.
FRENCH    -- Enfin, dit-elle dans un dernier cri, elle est avec M.
ENGLISH   The displays in the windows likewise became indistinct: you could only distinguish the snowy lace, its whiteness heightened by the ground glass globes of a row of gas jets, and against this chapel-like background the ready-made goods stood out vigorously, the velvet mantle trimmed with silver fox setting amidst them all the curved silhouette of a headless woman who seemed to be running through the rain to some entertainment in the unknown shades of nocturnal Paris.
ENGLISH    And as she turned round, she observed Geneviève on the threshold of the dining-room.
ENGLISH   For a time the matter threatened to assume a serious aspect; Mignot, the glove salesman, was mixed up in it.
ENGLISH   And she leant over to add: \"Didn\'t you see Monsieur Albert over there?\"  It was really young Lhomme, in the midst of three questionable women.
FRENCH    -- Non, répéta Denise avec une douceur entêtée.
ENGLISH   Draped in a mantle which was already two years old, she tried, in imagination, on her queenly shoulders all the most expensive garments she saw; and it was as though they had been torn from off her when she awoke and found herself still wearing her patched-up dresses, without the slightest hope of ever satisfying her passion.
ENGLISH   No establishment had ever yet stirred up the city with such an uproarious profusion of advertisements.
FRENCH   Voilà où nous en sommes, je suis forcé de m\'incliner devant les faits.
FRENCH   Autour des arcades des étages supérieurs, elles dessinaient des festons; le long des colonnes, elles descendaient en guirlandes; sur les balustrades des galeries, jusque sur les rampes des escaliers, elles filaient en lignes serrées; et, partout, rangées symétriquement, bariolant les murs de rouge, de vert et de jaune, elles semblaient de grandes lanternes vénitiennes, allumées pour quelque fête colossale.
ENGLISH   But they make up for it with the small establishments like yours.
FRENCH   Il avait appelé d\'un signe un marchand de marrons, installé en face, dans une étroite guérite, prise sur la boutique d\'un marchand de vin, et il lui disait:  -- Hein? Vigouroux, rendez-moi ce service...
FRENCH   On est couchée et nourrie, bien sûr; mais il y a la toilette, puis il est impossible de rester sans un sou, renfermée dans sa chambre, à regarder voler les mouches.
FRENCH    -- L\'année dernière a été désastreuse, expliquait l\'oncle.
FRENCH   En vareuse rouge, une toque renversée derrière le crâne, il avait à son bras la grande fille blanche, la barreuse, qui, pour porter les couleurs de la yole, s\'était planté une touffe de coquelicots sur l\'oreille.
ENGLISH    \"My pains?\" he murmured, in astonishment.
FRENCH   Nous verrons, nous verrons!  C\'était une déclaration de guerre.
ENGLISH   The Passage Choiseul opening before her, she passed through it and found herself in the Rue Monsigny, without knowing how, and ultimately came into the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin again.
FRENCH   Et ils causèrent, ils parlèrent d\'une partie à six, faite par eux dans un restaurant de Bougival, où les femmes avaient payé leur écot: ça valait mieux, tout le monde était à son aise.
FRENCH   Puis, elle devait lui conter, pour la centième fois, son passage aux confections, les souffrances du début, les petites chambres malsaines, la mauvaise nourriture, la continuelle bataille des vendeurs; et, tous deux, du matin au soir, ne parlaient ainsi que du magasin, le buvaient à chaque heure dans l\'air même qu\'ils respiraient.
ENGLISH   That very day he wanted fifteen francs, which sum alone could save him from somebody\'s vengeance.
ENGLISH   She could not go downstairs to buy a candle, in those streets swarming with debauchees, without feeling a man\'s hot breath behind her, and hearing crude, insulting remarks; and some individuals pursued her to the very end of the dark passage, encouraged by the sordid appearance of the house.
FRENCH   Ils faisaient bon ménage, malgré leur dissemblance, l\'un mangeant avec insouciance l\'argent qu\'il tirait à son père, l\'autre sans un sou, torturé par des idées d\'économies, ayant pourtant tous deux un point de commun, leur maladresse comme vendeurs, qui les laissait végéter dans leurs comptoirs, sans augmentations.
FRENCH   Puis, il venait d\'ouvrir un buffet, où l\'on donnait gratuitement des sirops et des biscuits, et un salon de lecture, une galerie monumentale, décorée avec un luxe trop riche, dans laquelle il risquait même des expositions de tableaux.
FRENCH   Et les dessous apparaissaient, tombaient un à un; les jupons blancs de toutes les longueurs, le jupon qui bride les genoux et le jupon à traîne dont la balayeuse couvre le sol, une mer montante de jupons, dans laquelle les jambes se noyaient; les pantalons en percale, en toile, en piqué, les larges pantalons blancs où danseraient les reins d\'un homme; les chemises enfin, boutonnées au cou pour la nuit, découvrant la poitrine le jour, ne tenant plus que par d\'étroites épaulettes, en simple calicot, en toile d\'Irlande, en batiste, le dernier voile blanc qui glissait de la gorge, le long des hanches.
ENGLISH   Mouret, rather vexed, merely said: \"Old Jouve has been floored this time but he\'ll have his revenge.\"  \"Oh!\" replied Vallagnosc, \"I don\'t think he\'s equal to it.
ENGLISH   But she went on with a forced gaiety, explaining that she had bought the mantle in question at The Ladies\' Paradise during the previous week.
ENGLISH    \"She\'s married, then?\" asked Favier, when Hutin returned from the pay-desk, where he had debited her with thirty yards of Duchess satin.
FRENCH   Tout autre que lui, ébranlé, aurait craint quelque méprise déplorable, car elle le menaçait de s\'adresser aux tribunaux, pour venger une telle injure.
ENGLISH   At the same time her uncle\'s shop made her feel ill at ease; she felt unreasonable disdain, instinctive repugnance for this cold, icy place, the home of old-fashioned trading.
ENGLISH   They continued gazing at each other, unable to find a word to say.
ENGLISH   Baudu was standing at his shop door looking on with a gloomy air.
FRENCH    Cette fois, Mouret s\'éloigna et reprit son inspection.
ENGLISH    \"Ah, no, indeed!\" exclaimed Henriette, recoiling.
FRENCH    -- Ne vous reculez pas, vous ne me gênez aucunement, dit Denise saisie d\'une grande pitié.
ENGLISH   The money-question was a graver one.
ENGLISH    \"I don\'t hurt you, madame?\" he inquired.
FRENCH   La chambre de la jeune fille donnait sur la cour, une petite chambre où tombait une clarté livide.
FRENCH    Il était près de cinq heures, le magasin reprenait un peu de vie, dans l\'air rafraîchi du soir.
FRENCH   Le projet du Crédit Immobilier était de créer, sur la rue du Dix-Décembre, une concurrence au Grand-Hôtel, un établissement luxueux, dont la situation centrale attirerait les étrangers.
ENGLISH   Four men carried him to a chemist\'s shop in the Rue Gaillon, whilst the omnibus slowly resumed its journey.
FRENCH    -- N\'importe! reprit-il, je lui en ai collé pour deux cent quatre- vingt-treize francs.
FRENCH    Denise dépliait les vêtements, les repliait, sans se permettre un geste d\'humeur.
FRENCH   C\'était de la besogne vivement et proprement faite.
FRENCH    Le commis faisait l\'article, jurait que c\'était tout soie, que le fabricant était en faillite, et qu\'on ne retrouverait jamais une occasion pareille.
ENGLISH   And the slightest stir, the faintest vibration, thus furnished him with matter for endless comment.
FRENCH    Puis, revenant et baissant la voix de nouveau:  -- Hein? je suis seconde, c\'est entendu!  Denise promit en riant, pour plaisanter à son tour.
FRENCH   Tout y aboutissait, le capital sans cesse renouvelé, le système de l\'entassement des marchandises, le bon marché qui attire, la marque en chiffres connus qui tranquillise.
FRENCH   Tâche de rire, il ne faut pas qu\'elle sache.
FRENCH   Les locataires qui faisaient un peu de cuisine s\'agenouillaient devant la cheminée, où se trouvait un fourneau de terre.
ENGLISH   In this way we can content ourselves with a very small profit; as our general expenses amount to as much as sixteen per cent., and as we seldom make more than twenty per cent.
ENGLISH   But, no, no, I can\'t, my word of honour! If I gave it up to you, you would blame me later on.\"  He stopped, trembling, and as the young man still kept his head down, he asked him for the third time, after a painful silence: \"You don\'t say anything?\" Then, at last, without venturing to look at him, Colomban replied: \"There\'s nothing to say.
FRENCH    -- N\'est-ce pas? Qu\'elle se peigne demain, c\'est inconvenant, répétait à Mme Aurélie le terrible Bourdoncle, qui dès l\'arrivée avait condamné Denise, plein de mépris pour ses petits membres.
ENGLISH   Customers, who had often reproached him for the darkness of his shop, would certainly come back to it again, when they saw it all bright and new.
ENGLISH   Baudu still hoped he was going to throw himself into his arms, exclaiming: \"Father, do you take a rest, we\'ll fight in our turn; give us the shop as it is, so that we may work a miracle and save it!\" Then, however, he looked at him, and felt full of shame, reproaching himself for having wished to dupe his children.
FRENCH   Vous avez une idée, sans doute.
ENGLISH   As you don\'t want me to, I won\'t go and marry you off, of course.\"  Denise hesitated, tormented by such a strong desire to go that the blood rushed to her cheeks.
FRENCH   Il se penchait, il murmurait à l\'oreille de la comtesse, d\'une voix polie:  -- Madame, veuillez me suivre.
ENGLISH   \"I\'ll take care that you shall be rewarded.\"  But Jouve was somewhat lukewarm for he knew something about women, and asked himself whether he had not better take the part of this girl, who might be the sovereign mistress of the morrow.
ENGLISH   Pretend not to know me, if you like.\"  Some salesmen were already looking at them in astonishment.
ENGLISH   Certainly his dining-room wasn\'t over large or too well aired or lighted; but at least it spoke to him of his life, for he had lived there amidst the affection of his kith and kin.
FRENCH   Des faits lui revenaient: Était-ce possible que sa fille tombât malade, à cause du commis? Elle l\'aimait donc au point de ne pouvoir attendre? Encore un malheur de ce côté! Cela le bouleversait, d\'autant plus qu\'il avait lui-même des idées arrêtées sur ce mariage.
FRENCH   Le million couvrit le bureau, écrasa les papiers, faillit renverser l\'encre; et l\'or, et l\'argent, et le cuivre, coulant des sacs, crevant des sacoches, faisaient un gros tas, le tas de la recette brute, telle qu\'elle sortait des mains de la clientèle, encore chaude et vivante.
FRENCH   Le grand vieillard s\'était glissé dans l\'ombre, pour s\'emplir les yeux de cet étalage triomphal; et, la face douloureuse, il ne sentait pas même la pluie qui battait sa tête nue, dont les cheveux blancs ruisselaient.
FRENCH   Vide de clients pendant le jour, ce café s\'emplissait vers huit heures et demi d\'un flot débordant d\'employés de commerce, le flot lâché à la rue par la haute porte de la place Gaillon.
ENGLISH   The young man would watch for her and invent any pretext to run after her; and then affected to be surprised when he met her at the work-room door.
ENGLISH    \"How so?\" he asked, turning very pale.
FRENCH    Il ne répondit pas, la regarda disparaître.
FRENCH    -- À droite, mesdames, dit Hutin en reprenant sa marche.
FRENCH   Vingt fois, il l\'avait prédit; même elle devait se souvenir qu\'il l\'avait chargée d\'avertir son oncle d\'un désastre fatal, si ce dernier s\'attardait dans des vieilleries ridicules.
ENGLISH   \"Show me the thickest you have.\"  Colomban took down another bundle.
FRENCH   Près de lui, dans son étonnement, Denise paraissait plus mince encore, avec son visage long à bouche trop grande, son teint fatigué déjà, sous sa chevelure pâle.
ENGLISH   There was a Spanish blonde-lace cravat, thirty francs: she hadn\'t wanted it, but the shopman had sworn it was the last one in stock, and that in future the price would be raised.
FRENCH   Pendant que Denise était allée chercher des manteaux de voyage, Mme Desforges, qui regardait autour d\'elle, s\'aperçut dans une glace; et elle restait à se contempler.
FRENCH    Mouret s\'était remis.
ENGLISH   At first nothing was heard but a loud clattering of knives and forks, the gormandizing of big fellows whom thirteen hours\' daily work incessantly rendered hungry.
FRENCH   Nous ne pouvons pourtant pas faire que madame soit moins forte.
ENGLISH   Three months after the marriage, however, the second brother Deleuze died childless; so that when Caroline met her death, Mouret became sole heir, sole proprietor of The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   Nous inscrivons ce qui se présente...
FRENCH    Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S.
FRENCH   Il faudra que je voie.
FRENCH   Il ne voyait plus d\'autre but, tout disparaissait dans ce besoin: la tenir enfin chez lui, l\'asseoir sur ses genoux, en la baisant aux lèvres; et, à cette vision, le sang de ses veines battait, il demeurait tremblant, bouleversé de son impuissance.
FRENCH   Mais elle doit trouver que je maigris trop à la fin...
FRENCH    -- Certainement, ce n\'est pas drôle, un homme pareil, reprit Clara.
FRENCH   Elle laissa tomber deux grosses larmes.
FRENCH   Vous aimez quelqu\'un.
ENGLISH    \"You hear, Monsieur Baudu,\" he resumed, \"your niece is on their side, it\'s she whom they have commissioned to corrupt me.
FRENCH   Vinçard l\'accompagna jusqu\'à la porte, en renouvelant l\'expression de ses regrets.
FRENCH   La direction ne tolérait pas ces accidents-là, la maternité était supprimée comme encombrante et indécente; à la rigueur, on permettait le mariage, mais on défendait les enfants.
ENGLISH    Meanwhile the news had spread through the various departments, causing guilty consciences to tremble, whilst the most honest quaked at thought of the general sweep that seemed imminent.
ENGLISH   The sole ornaments on the walls, painted a light yellow, were the napkin cupboards.
FRENCH   Elle était restée en détresse, au rayon des meubles, à côté de la table à ouvrage.
ENGLISH   It was Colomban.
FRENCH   Elle s\'en irait.
ENGLISH    \"Don\'t you think me childish--eh? If I don\'t make haste and get my braid and be off, I shall be done for.\"  Unfortunately, there was such a crush in the mercery department that she could not get served.
ENGLISH   With a smiling face he would come in and walk round the tables; sometimes he would even indulge in a little gossip, and inquire if they had made a good lunch.
ENGLISH   And that afternoon at sight of his mute smile, Denise trembled, as if she were in fault.
FRENCH    Mouret eut un geste superbe.
FRENCH    -- Et ce manteau, va-t-il?  -- Oui, oui, très bien...
ENGLISH   He spent long hours there every day, trying to interest himself in this work, of which he had so long dreamed.
FRENCH   Pourtant, lorsqu\'elle passa devant la salle à manger des chefs de comptoir et des seconds, elle ne put s\'empêcher d\'y jeter un coup d\'oeil.
FRENCH   Denise, heureuse, se laissait porter par cette sympathie grandissante.
ENGLISH    \"By the way,\" all at once resumed Favier, \"she\'s going to stay, you know.
FRENCH    -- Quel âge avez-vous donc?  -- Vingt ans, madame.
ENGLISH    \"And I\'m fearfully hungry, too!\" he murmured.
FRENCH   Ils vous prennent par ces petits êtres maintenant! Tu sais si je fais des folies pour moi! Mais comment veux-tu résister à des bébés qui ont envie de tout? J\'étais venue les promener, et voilà que je dévalise les magasins!  Justement, Mouret qui se trouvait encore là, en compagnie de Vallagnosc et de M.
FRENCH    Ce qui arrêtait ces dames, c\'était le spectacle prodigieux de la grande exposition de blanc.
FRENCH   Alors, Denise, vivement, se pencha, la baisa sur les joues, toute frissonnante de se sentir aux lèvres la flamme de ces joues creuses.
ENGLISH   Things were getting worse than ever, and if he did not kill himself, it was simply from idleness and a dislike of trouble.
FRENCH    -- Vous restez bien quelques minutes?  -- Oui, j\'ai à causer avec M.
FRENCH   La pièce, blanc et or, d\'une nudité banale de salle d\'hôtel, était meublée d\'un piano, d\'un guéridon central, de fauteuils et de canapés recouverts de housses blanches.
ENGLISH   You found the bright scarlet of the geranium, the creamy white of the petunia, the golden yellow of the chrysanthemum, the celestial azure of the verbena; and higher up, on brass rods, another florescence was entwined, a florescence of carelessly hung _fichus_ and unrolled ribbons, quite a brilliant _cordon_, which extended on and on, climbing the columns and constantly multiplying in the mirrors.
FRENCH   Non, c\'était honnête, c\'était de la famille, ça ne jouait pas sur la vente comme sur une valeur de Bourse.
FRENCH   Et, au milieu de cette hostilité générale, l\'étrange bienveillance de l\'inspecteur Jouve l\'étonnait; s\'il la trouvait à l\'écart, il lui souriait, cherchait un mot aimable; deux fois, il lui avait évité des réprimandes, sans qu\'elle lui en témoignât de la gratitude, plus troublée que touchée de sa protection.
FRENCH   Eh bien! vous aviez raison de vous presser, vous qui la défendiez au café, hier soir!  À son tour, il se sauva; mais, quand il rentra aux lainages, il avait déjà raconté l\'histoire de la lettre à quatre ou cinq vendeurs.
ENGLISH   A suffocating, hot-house heat surprised one at sight of these frozen heights.
ENGLISH   She was in particular very hard with beginners, even as life had shown itself hard for her at first.
FRENCH   N\'allait-on pas la sacrifier à cette dernière, en profitant d\'un prétexte quelconque? Son masque d\'empereur soufflé de graisse semblait avoir maigri de la honte qui entachait maintenant la dynastie des Lhomme: et elle affectait de s\'en aller chaque soir au bras de son mari, rapprochés tous deux par l\'infortune, comprenant que le mal venait de la débandade de leur intérieur; tandis que le pauvre homme, plus affecté qu\'elle, dans la peur maladive qu\'on ne le soupçonnât lui-même de vol, comptait deux fois les recettes, bruyamment, en faisant avec son mauvais bras de véritables miracles.
ENGLISH   Behind her uncle, who was plodding along with the blind, mute face of an ox about to be poleaxed, she seemed to hear the tramping of a flock of sheep likewise being led to the slaughter-house.
FRENCH   Le blessé trouva encore la force de dire:  -- Non, non, des reins plus solides auraient plié tout de même...
FRENCH    -- Écoute-moi bien, reprit le drapier.
FRENCH   Avait-on jamais vu cela? un magasin de nouveautés où l\'on vendait de tout! un bazar alors! Aussi le personnel était gentil: un tas de godelureaux qui manoeuvraient comme dans une gare, qui traitaient les marchandises et les clientes comme des paquets, lâchant le patron ou lâché par lui pour un mot, sans affection, sans moeurs, sans art! Et il prit tout d\'un coup à témoin Colomban: certes, lui, Colomban, élevé à la bonne école, savait de quelle façon lente et sûre on arrivait aux finesses, aux roueries du métier.
FRENCH    -- J\'achète une branche de pommier, reprit Mme Marty.
FRENCH   Oh! il m\'a fait du tort, le gredin! Mais il ne tient encore que les draps de dame, les draps légers, pour robes, et les draps plus forts, pour manteaux.
ENGLISH   Mosaics and faience likewise formed part of the decoration, enlivening the friezes, and lighting up the severe _ensemble_ with their fresh tints; whilst the stairs, with red-velvet covered hand-rails, were edged with bands of polished iron, which shone like the steel of armour.
ENGLISH   The governor did not interrupt the work.
FRENCH   Prenez garde! ils vous passeraient sur le corps.
ENGLISH    The inquiry being finished, the noise of the knives and forks commenced once more.
ENGLISH    \"We must be prepared for anything,\" murmured Baudu at last.
FRENCH   Il va plus mal qu\'auparavant...
FRENCH   Elle revoyait la longue lutte des deux boutiques, elle assistait aux convois de Geneviève et de Mme Baudu, elle avait sous les yeux le Vieil Elbeuf renversé, égorgé à terre par le Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH    Les blancheurs mourantes du ciel s\'éteignaient dans les cuivres des meubles.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s true; all those shop-girls look like ladies\' maids, don\'t they? Yes, it\'s a young person come to alter a mantle.\"  Mouret gazed at her intently, a suspicion flashing across his mind.
ENGLISH   And to think that cunning Bouthemont had just managed to get hold of Madame Sauveur\'s messenger, the skinny woman with whom he was talking! That meant good business, three or four dozen pieces, at least, for the celebrated dressmaker always gave large orders.
ENGLISH   His smile returned to him but it was instinct with the secret maliciousness of the experienced salesman, who shrewdly guessed into what an awkward position he had just thrown both the ladies and the young girl.
ENGLISH   In your place I should beware, for he\'s too kind to you.
ENGLISH   Wait for me, we\'ll leave together.\"  Henriette had now sat down again; and, while listening to Vallagnosc, who was announcing that Madame de Boves would probably pay her a visit, she did not take her eyes off Mouret.
FRENCH    Denise était gênée dans cette chambre de garçon.
ENGLISH   I was still wearing short dresses, when Colomban began courting me.
FRENCH   La porte, d\'ailleurs, restait entrouverte; on entendait Mouret demander gaiement au commis s\'il venait de passer de bonnes vacances; il n\'était nullement question d\'un renvoi, la conversation au contraire tomba sur certaines mesures à prendre dans le rayon.
ENGLISH   But they say Robineau has procured her a little work, some neckties.
FRENCH   Mais, de l\'autre côté de la rue, ce qui la passionnait; c\'était le Bonheur des Dames, dont elle apercevait les vitrines, par la porte ouverte.
FRENCH   Mais, dans cette volupté molle du crépuscule, au milieu de l\'odeur échauffée de leurs épaules, il demeurait quand même leur maître, sous le ravissement qu\'il affectait.
FRENCH   On vous en donne toujours de trop.
FRENCH   Vous dites qu\'il a coûté?  -- Le chantilly vingt-cinq francs, et la monture deux cents, dit Henriette.
ENGLISH   Can I hang such a weight about your neck? Instead of leaving you a good business, I should leave you a bankruptcy perhaps.
ENGLISH   And how much do you think the rogue, has got for the house? One hundred and fifty thousand francs, four times its value! There\'s another thief, if you like! Just fancy, he has taken advantage of my embellishments, making capital out of the fact that the house has been done up.
ENGLISH    \"What can we serve you with to-day, madame?\"  \"Nothing, thanks,\" replied Henriette.
FRENCH    -- Oh! à la perfection, madame! répétait Mignot.
FRENCH   Alors, dans son abandon de paria, atteinte à ses plus intimes pudeurs de femme et révoltée contre l\'injustice, elle étrangla les sanglots qui lui montaient à la gorge.
ENGLISH   Ah! how many times did I write advising him not to take those dye-works! He was a good-hearted fellow certainly, but he had no head for business And you were left with those two youngsters to look after--you\'ve had to keep them, eh?\"  His bilious face had now become clearer, his eyes were not so bloodshot as when he had stood glaring at The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   Marguerite, passée seconde aux confections, se répandait en éloges.
FRENCH   C\'était une très grosse affaire, la maison y jouait sa fortune, car les bruits du quartier avaient un fond de vérité, Mouret se jetait en poète dans la spéculation, avec un tel faste, un besoin tel du colossal, que tout semblait devoir craquer sous lui.
FRENCH   Ma femme et Geneviève m\'ont prié de t\'inviter, si je te rencontrais.
FRENCH    -- Je ne veux pas savoir.
ENGLISH   Passers-by lingered to talk to the workmen, who began crying out against those old buildings which were only good for killing people.
ENGLISH   Besides, they are suspicious about me; they know I should then be even less inclined to give way.
ENGLISH   Then he resumed: \"They\'ve paid me, \'tis true; and, after all, their money is as good as another\'s.
FRENCH   À terre, les tapis recommençaient, une jonchée de toisons grasses: il y avait, au centre, un tapis d\'Agra, une pièce extraordinaire à fond blanc et à large bordure bleu tendre, où couraient des ornements violâtres, d\'une imagination exquise; partout, ensuite, s\'étalaient des merveilles, les tapis de la Mecque aux reflets de velours, les tapis de prière du Daghestan à la pointe symbolique, les tapis du Kurdistan, semés de fleurs épanouies; enfin, dans un coin, un écroulement à bon marché, des tapis de Gheurdès, de Coula et de Kircheer, en tas, depuis quinze francs.
ENGLISH   She got to laugh about the matter and it became quite an understood thing.
FRENCH    -- Merci, je vais faire le tour alors et passer par la soierie...
ENGLISH   Woman now came and spent her leisure time in his establishment, those shivering anxious hours which she had formerly passed in churches: a necessary consumption of nervous passion, an ever renewed struggle of the god of dress against the husband, an ever renewed worship of the body with the promise of future divine beauty.
FRENCH   N\'était-ce pas raisonnable? Certes, il ne marchandait pas, il donnait l\'argent qu\'on exigeait; mais, au moins, qu\'on eût un peu d\'intelligence, qu\'on le laissât finir son oeuvre! Est-ce qu\'on se mêlait d\'arrêter les locomotives, sur les chemins de fer? Elle l\'écoutait, les yeux baissés, ne trouvant que des raisons de sentiment.
FRENCH   Ensuite, le forage du puits avait violemment préoccupé les maisons voisines, un puits de cent mètres, dont le débit devait être de cinq cents litres à la minute.
FRENCH   Quand elle devait se rendre à la direction pour prendre des ordres ou pour donner un renseignement, il la retenait à causer, il aimait l\'entendre.
ENGLISH   You are my sole consolation, for if all that hurry and scurry is what they now call business I understand nothing of it and would rather clear out.\"  Geneviève, with her head on one side as if her thick hair were weighing down her pale brow, sat watching the smiling shopman; and in her glance there was a gleam of suspicion, a wish to see whether Colomban, stricken with remorse, would not blush at all this praise.
FRENCH   Elle salua à son tour et dit simplement:  -- Merci, monsieur.
ENGLISH   For a long time he pressed her with questions, with a growing anxiety; and the mute dignity of this innocent girl once more seemed to be the artful calculation of a woman learned in all the tactics of passion.
ENGLISH   The latter, now about to become a mother, was trembling, for she knew that two other saleswomen similarly circumstanced had been sent away.
ENGLISH   The lofty plate-glass door in a corner facing the Place Gaillon reached the first storey amidst a medley of ornaments covered with gilding.
FRENCH   Quand Bourdoncle s\'était fait craindre, lui soignait sa popularité.
ENGLISH    \"Jean is here.
FRENCH   Et Mouret, qui l\'aimait en homme actif et pressé, habitué à chiffrer ses tendresses, oubliait alors tout calcul de séduction et se sentait pour elle une amitié de camarade.
FRENCH   Épouse-moi, ou je m\'en vais.
ENGLISH   The former was a little woman, consumed by anæmia and quite white--white hair, white eyes and white lips.
ENGLISH    \"Very good!\" repeated Mouret, still pretending to read.
FRENCH    Depuis la fin d\'août, elle avait épousé Baugé, une vraie sottise, disait-elle gaiement.
ENGLISH   Next came a Chantilly veil: rather dear, fifty francs; if she didn\'t wear it she could make it do for her daughter.
ENGLISH   Tell me, must I go on my knees to touch your heart?\"  He had come to this.
FRENCH   Oh! vous êtes un bon garçon, je veux bien être votre amie, mais pas davantage...
FRENCH   Sa tante surtout l\'inquiétait, elle était restée dans une stupeur blême, depuis la mort de Geneviève; il semblait que sa vie s\'en allât un peu à chaque heure; et, lorsqu\'on l\'interrogeait, elle répondait d\'un air étonné qu\'elle ne souffrait pas, qu\'elle était comme prise de sommeil, simplement.
FRENCH   de Boves examinait les tableaux, avec l\'intention évidente de perdre dans la foule son futur gendre.
FRENCH   Oui, la serge à petit pointillé, celle à deux francs.
FRENCH   Qu\'on fasse la retouche tout de suite.
FRENCH   C\'est une chance pour elle, ce qui arrive.
ENGLISH   Ah! that\'s cost me something: nearly two years\' pleading, and the solicitors and the barristers! Never mind, he won\'t pass under my shop, the judges have decided that such work as that could not be considered legitimate repairing.
FRENCH   Chacun son idée, ma fille...
ENGLISH   As she slowly reached the bottom of the left-hand staircase, leaning on the banister, she came upon a group of grinning salesmen.
FRENCH   «Prenez toujours, madame: vous nous rendrez l\'article, s\'il cesse de vous plaire.» Et la femme, qui résistait, trouvait là une dernière excuse, la possibilité de revenir sur une folie: elle prenait, la conscience en règle.
FRENCH   Ma parole d\'honneur! nous la donnons à perte.
ENGLISH   But the landlord, a retired fruiterer, as big a scoundrel as they, wanted to make them shell out more.
FRENCH    Et elle s\'en alla, précédée du vendeur qui portait les vingt-cinq mètres de soie, et qui la conduisit à la caisse 10, où le jeune Albert perdait la tête, au milieu des demandes de factures dont il était assiégé.
FRENCH    -- Tenez! vous êtes un gentil garçon, je vous aime...
FRENCH    Ils suivirent un des corridors étroits, où le gaz brûlait continuellement.
FRENCH   Une chaleur de serre, suffocante, surprenait, en face de ces hauteurs glacées.
FRENCH   Elles l\'avaient laissé, la semaine d\'auparavant, et elles espéraient qu\'il ne reparaîtrait plus.
FRENCH   Mais il faudra que je te montre ma machine en branle, tu verras que ce n\'est pas si bête...
ENGLISH    \"They are your brothers, are they not?\" asked Mouret, after a silence.
FRENCH   Mais il avait oublié l\'inventaire, il ne voyait pas son empire, ces magasins crevant de richesses.
FRENCH   Il n\'y avait plus que cet aveuglement, un blanc de lumière où tous les blancs se fondaient, une poussière d\'étoiles neigeant dans la clarté blanche.
ENGLISH   What were those three simpletons doing there, gaping in front of the cheap-jack\'s show booth?  \"What about uncle?\" asked Denise, suddenly, as if just waking up.
ENGLISH    \"Denise Baudu, madame.\"  \"Your age?\"  \"Twenty years and four months.\" And risking a glance at Mouret, at this supposed manager, whom she met everywhere and whose presence troubled her so much, she repeated: \"I don\'t look like it, but I am really very strong.\"  They smiled.
ENGLISH    Meanwhile Mouret, still standing before the reading-room with Vallagnosc, was inhaling this odour, intoxicating himself with it, and repeating: \"They are quite at home.
FRENCH    -- Ne vous inquiétez pas, il n\'y a pas de danger immédiat...
ENGLISH   In spite of the cold, the shopmen who were selling in the street could not serve fast enough.
ENGLISH   When Bourras had opened the door he was obliged to remain on the landing in order that Denise might enter with ease.
FRENCH   Vous verrez, vous verrez!  Il devenait éloquent.
ENGLISH   Liénard, with the view of sparing his arms, which was his principal thought, manœuvred so as to make her take one of the stuffs already unfolded on the counter.
FRENCH    -- Oui, répondit Denise en rougissant, j\'accompagnais une cliente.
FRENCH   Depuis quinze jours, elle était brisée de soucis et de fatigues.
FRENCH   Nous montons, nous autres.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s that creature\'s fault,\" repeated Henriette.
FRENCH    Il était aussi timide qu\'elle, il se risquait à l\'aborder, parce qu\'il la sentait tremblante comme lui.
FRENCH   Au- dehors, montait un lointain brouhaha, des curieux qui se bousculaient en face des vitrines, des fiacres qui stationnaient sur la place Gaillon, toute l\'approche, d\'une foule.
ENGLISH   \"I want to go up to the first floor.
FRENCH   Deslignières avait eu une attaque, Piot et Rivoire marchaient en silence, le nez à terre, en hommes finis.
ENGLISH    \"Some lace, like that, up her sleeve,\" she continued stammering.
FRENCH   Nous avons des occasions extraordinaires.
FRENCH    Il se mit à rire, pendant que l\'autre le regardait d\'un air admiratif.
FRENCH   N\'était-ce qu\'une parole de femme jalouse? Mais elle ne lui laissa pas le temps de la questionner, elle ajouta:  -- Enfin, vous savez combien je m\'intéresse à vous...
ENGLISH   All these young ladies had evidently guessed that she was an applicant for the vacancy, and were taking stock of her, ill-naturedly pulling her to pieces with the secret hostility of people at table who do not like to close up to make room for hungry outsiders.
ENGLISH   It will be splendid, all the same.
FRENCH    Denise leur souriait, malgré son tourment.
ENGLISH   Then Vallagnosc, in an effeminate voice, began to parade his theories of the insipidity of things, making almost a boast of the immobility and emptiness of his existence.
ENGLISH   They were all there, with heads erect and gestures abrupt, quite at home, not showing the slightest politeness to one another but making as much use of the house as they could, even to the point of carrying away the dust from its walls.
ENGLISH   There was, however, nothing exceptional in all this.
ENGLISH   Within, beneath the flaming gas-jets, which, burning in the twilight, had illumined the last supreme efforts of the sale, everything looked like a field of battle still warm with the massacre of the materials.
ENGLISH   He never raised his head, and she thought she suffered from his vanity.
ENGLISH   Do you detest him?\"  Pauline had retained hold of Denise\'s hand, as the latter sat near the bed, with her elbow resting on the bolster; and Denise was overcome by sudden emotion.
FRENCH   Depuis la soirée de Joinville, elle n\'osait lire dans son coeur, où se heurtaient des sentiments confus.
ENGLISH    \"If only one of these rooms were vacant,\" resumed Bourras.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, disait-il, vous n\'allez pas faire la sauvage avec un ami qui vous ménage toujours.
FRENCH   Elle était touchée de ces marques de considération, elle voulait y voir une sympathie pour la misère de ses débuts et le succès final de son long courage.
FRENCH   Il faudra bien que ça finisse, et il n\'y a encore que le mariage, puisque vous ne voulez point de l\'autre affaire...
ENGLISH   But there\'s still that dreadful hair!\" With these words he rose from his seat and stepped up to her to try and smooth her rebellious tresses in the same familiar way as Madame Aurélie on the previous day.
FRENCH   Et ce million imbécile qui était là! il en souffrait comme d\'une ironie, il l\'aurait poussé à la rue.
ENGLISH   And afterwards when she revealed herself to be a remarkably clever saleswoman, well up in the mechanism of the house, the others conspired to deprive her of all good customers.
FRENCH   Est-ce que Geneviève est en danger?  Mme Baudu ne répondit pas tout de suite.
FRENCH   Oui, j\'ai été assez naïf pour le prier de chercher des actionnaires à Toulouse.
FRENCH   Est-ce trop cher, deux cents francs, cette monture?  Mouret était resté debout, au milieu des cinq femmes, souriant, s\'intéressant à ce qui les intéressait.
ENGLISH   Robineau, when he made this calculation in Denise\'s presence one evening, after dinner, was quite overcome for a moment, and remained staring at his empty plate.
ENGLISH    For some minutes a stout man with grey hair and a large yellow face had been looking at them from a shop-door on the other side of the street.
ENGLISH   Held by a string it floated in the air and sailed along every street like a living advertisement.
ENGLISH   In the lace department there was a second-hand, a gay young spark who pursued Clara with all sorts of suggestive stories, simply by way of a joke--for he really cared so little for her that he made no effort to meet her out of doors; and thus it was from counter to counter, the gentlemen and the young ladies would exchange winks, nods, and remarks, which they alone understood.
FRENCH    Cependant, leurs yeux ne quittaient pas la porte, elles étaient prises et emportées dans le vent de la foule.
FRENCH   de Vallagnosc, annonça le domestique.
FRENCH   Sous cette hâblerie normande, il cachait simplement des filles ramassées au fond des brasseries et des cafés-concerts.
ENGLISH   It was in vain that she summoned up her courage, struggling with all her gaiety and all her reason in the endeavour not to yield to the misgivings of her tender nature; she burst into blinding tears as soon as she had closed the door of her bedroom, in desolation at the thought of finding herself in the street, on bad terms with her uncle, not knowing where to go, without a copper saved, and with the two children to look after.
FRENCH    Mais, avant de sortir, il donna l\'ordre au second commis d\'aller à la gare prendre la malle de Denise.
ENGLISH   She\'s not very well.
ENGLISH   \"Oh! there are some women who\'ve bothered me awfully, I must confess.
FRENCH   Une boiserie, de la couleur de l\'enseigne, d\'un vert bouteille que le temps avait nuancé d\'ocre et de bitume, ménageait, à droite et à gauche, deux vitrines profondes, noires, poussiéreuses, où l\'on distinguait vaguement des pièces d\'étoffe entassées.
FRENCH   Depuis son entrée au Bonheur des Dames, l\'argent était son cruel souci.
ENGLISH   Tall, with a clear skin and carefully trimmed beard, he had eyes the colour of old gold and of a velvety softness, which he fixed on her for a moment as he crossed the Place.
FRENCH   Silencieux, il laissait plaisanter, il avalait de grosses bouchées de pain, en épluchant le cou avec l\'art infini d\'un garçon qui avait le respect de la viande.
ENGLISH   \"My dear, you made him swallow that! I say, if anything should happen to me, you would speak for me, wouldn\'t you? Yes, yes, don\'t put on that astonished air, we know that a word from you would revolutionize the house.\"  And thereupon she ran off to her counter.
FRENCH   La monture ne coûte deux cents francs.
FRENCH   Pourtant, il suffisait que son mari voulût vaincre: elle se passionnait avec lui, serait morte à son comptoir.
ENGLISH    \"What do you get there?\" resumed Mouret.
FRENCH   Puis, il y avait encore une salle, les layettes, où le blanc voluptueux de la femme aboutissait au blanc candide de l\'enfant: une innocence, une joie, l\'amante qui se réveille mère, des brassières en piqué pelucheux, des béguins en flanelle, des chemises et des bonnets grands comme des joujoux, et des robes de baptême, et des pelisses de cachemire, le duvet blanc de la naissance, pareil à une pluie fine de plumes blanches.
FRENCH   Quand elle dort, il nous semble qu\'elle est guérie.
FRENCH   C\'était peu, mais il avait derrière lui Gaujean, qui devait le soutenir par de longs crédits.
FRENCH   Puis, lorsque, prise de remords, elle lui expliqua de quelle façon Lhomme adaptait à son moignon un système de pinces, dont il le servait ensuite comme d\'une main, il hocha la tête, saisi de méfiance, déclarant qu\'on ne lui ferait pas avaler celle-là.
ENGLISH   At ten o\'clock a servant appeared.
FRENCH   C\'est le chiffre qui a dû augmenter ainsi la monture.
FRENCH    -- Elle est bien chiffon, répétait Mme Marty.
ENGLISH   One morning, in the office, before the board-meeting began, Bourdoncle ventured to hint that the little girl in the mantle department was playing with him.
FRENCH   Mais là, de nouveau, il revint au Bonheur des Dames; tout l\'y ramenait, c\'était une obsession maladive.
FRENCH   Ces demoiselles se ménageaient, droites et lentes, pour se préparer aux fatigues de l\'après-midi.
FRENCH    -- Non, non, merci, répondait-elle chaque fois, sans une défaillance.
ENGLISH   In the morning they arrived at the Paradise together; and in the evening, the first who found himself free, after the folding was done, waited for the other at the Café Saint-Roch, in the Rue Saint-Roch, a little place where many employees of The Ladies\' Paradise met, brawling, drinking, and playing cards amidst the smoke of their pipes.
ENGLISH   Mouret generally got angry when any one recommended these broken-down gentlewomen to him; there were no more incapable, more insupportable, more narrow-minded creatures than these gentlewomen, said he; and, besides, a saleswoman could not be improvised, she must serve an apprenticeship, it was an intricate and delicate business.
FRENCH   Ma parole, la terre se détraque!  Le corbillard traversait alors la place de la Trinité, et, du coin de la sombre voiture, où Denise écoutait la plainte continue du vieux marchand, bercée au train funèbre du convoi, elle put voir, en débouchant de la rue de la Chaussée-d\'Antin, le corps qui montait déjà la pente de la rue Blanche.
ENGLISH    \"Upon my word,\" said he, \"so much the worse for the manufacturers! Every one would laugh at me if I ruined myself in fighting for other people\'s benefit, when those fellows are struggling as to who shall make at the cheapest price! As you said some time ago, the manufacturers have only to follow the march of progress by a better organization and new methods.
ENGLISH    But she caught sight of Madame Marty and Valentine at the further end of another gallery, a long way off.
FRENCH    -- Ce pauvre Robineau est fichu, il a une figure d\'homme qui se noie...
FRENCH   Il n\'a pas d\'yeux, il faut lui faire des yeux, maintenant.
FRENCH   Il n\'y a aucune raison pour que ça s\'arrête.
FRENCH   C\'était ainsi que le premier à la soie avait fini par devenir le confident de son patron et de la jolie veuve: il faisait leurs petites commissions, causait de l\'un avec l\'autre, les raccommodait parfois.
FRENCH    -- Elle est vraiment très bonne, murmura l\'intéressé.
ENGLISH   I know very well that they\'ve stolen him from me, just as they\'ve robbed us of everything else.\"  Then she went to sit down at the desk beside her mother.
FRENCH   Sous le soleil, dont un rayon enfilait la rue, les panneaux verts, aux rechampis jaunes et rouges, miroitaient comme des glaces, envoyaient des reflets aveuglants jusqu\'au fond du Vieil Elbeuf.
ENGLISH   I feel convinced that there are enough customers in Paris for one or two more big shops; but the district would have to be well chosen.
ENGLISH   Then, after inventing some pretext to enable her to go to the other end of the establishment and read these letters, she became full of fear; poor Jean seemed to be lost.
FRENCH   Peu à peu, la dette avait grandi; il s\'était décidé, comme ressource suprême, à hypothéquer l\'antique immeuble de la rue de la Michodière, où le vieux Finet, l\'ancêtre, avait fondé la maison; et ce n\'était plus, maintenant, qu\'une question de jours, l\'émiettement s\'achevait, les plafonds eux-mêmes devaient s\'écrouler et s\'envoler en poussière, ainsi qu\'une construction barbare et vermoulue, emportée par le vent.
FRENCH   Voyez-vous, lorsqu\'on ne sait pas prendre les maîtresses des autres, et qu\'on est assez gauche pour ne pas gagner de l\'argent autant qu\'eux, eh bien! on devrait crever tout de suite dans un coin...
FRENCH    Des vendeurs les regardaient déjà, l\'air étonné.
FRENCH   Il n\'y a rien, quand on crève.
ENGLISH    \"A pack of ignorant beggars,\" said he, \"who are satisfied with sticking a certain quantity of silk on so much whalebone! They buy their handles by the gross, handles ready-made.
FRENCH   Personne ne l\'aimait, et la pensée brusque de Mouret venait de lui ôter toute sa résignation.
ENGLISH   They had all four remained on the pavement, amidst the crush at the entrance.
ENGLISH   Yes, Pauline Cugnot is my name; and my parents are millers.
ENGLISH   It was thus that Bouthemont had ultimately become the confidant of his employer and the handsome widow; he did their little errands, talked of the one to the other, and sometimes reconciled them.
FRENCH    Mais Denise, sous ces haleines chaudes qui éveillaient peu à peu la femme en elle, gardait encore sa paix d\'enfant.
FRENCH   Avez-vous vu le salon oriental?  -- Superbe! inouï!  Et, au milieu des coups de coude, bousculées par le flot croissant des petites bourses qui se jetaient sur les lainages à bon marché, elles se pâmèrent au sujet de l\'exposition des tapis.
FRENCH   Sur le rapport de Jouve, il décidait le renvoi de Deloche: ce vendeur était stupide, il se laissait continuellement voler, jamais il n\'aurait d\'autorité sur les clientes.
ENGLISH   The façade already appeared above the level of the street; and indications of the spacious porch, and the windows of the first storey, a palace-like development in a crude state could be seen.
ENGLISH   Six thousand francs a year; a very easy berth.\"  He stopped suddenly in front of her.
ENGLISH   Specially charged with the indoor police service he was on the look-out for thieves and \"lifters.\"  \"The mercery department, ladies?\" said he obligingly, \"turn to the left; you see! just there behind the hosiery department.\"  Madame de Boves thanked him.
FRENCH    Cependant, Mouret partageait l\'indignation de l\'intéressé.
ENGLISH   \"Dear me! so she is,\" said he.
FRENCH   Il tendait, vers la tête de dogue, des mains impatientes.
FRENCH    À demi couché sur le comptoir, il lui tenait la main, prenait les doigts un à un, faisant glisser le gant d\'une caresse longue, reprise et appuyée; et il la regardait comme s\'il eût attendu, sur son visage, la défaillance d\'une joie voluptueuse.
FRENCH    En effet, Robineau, qui rentrait, passait et saluait ces messieurs, en se rendant à sa table.
FRENCH   Ils sont à table.
FRENCH   Ah! ils ont acheté la maison, et ils pensent me tenir! Eh bien, c\'est fini, ils ne l\'auront pas! J\'aurais cédé peut-être, mais puisqu\'elle est à eux, qu\'ils essayent donc de la prendre!  -- Alors, la nouvelle est vraie? dit Baudu de sa voix lente.
FRENCH    Cependant, il y avait peu de place pour les songeries dangereuses, au milieu de son existence de travail.
ENGLISH    \"Isn\'t he?\" she exclaimed, with the involuntary impulse of a woman in love.
FRENCH    -- Vous y renoncez aussi? cria gaiement Mme de Boves.
FRENCH    \"Project Gutenberg\" is a registered trademark.
ENGLISH   \"You\'ll floor them, I stake my life! Ah! you owe me a rare good thing; I told you that this was a golden affair!\"  He had just taken a restaurant at Vincennes.
FRENCH   Et elle jurait de le rendre fou de tendresse, lui dont l\'amour d\'homme pressé avait le charme facile d\'une chanson jetée à tous les vents.
ENGLISH   Her friend had disappeared.
FRENCH    Ce fut un nouveau désastre.
ENGLISH   Madame de Boves herself did not expect her husband.
FRENCH   Aussi sont-ils à genoux devant les grands magasins.
ENGLISH    \"Ah, you\'re the last of the old stock, my dear fellow,\" Baudu ended by declaring.
ENGLISH   In these corridors were the reserves, large vaults closed with iron railings, containing the surplus goods of each department.
ENGLISH   Oh! a bargain! Twenty francs!\"  And after that the bag became inexhaustible.
ENGLISH    Mouret threw his arms out.
ENGLISH    \"Well, I don\'t want to disgust you,\" he resumed, trying to calm himself; \"if you think it to your interest to go there, I shall be the first to say, \'go.\'\"  \"I am sure of that, uncle,\" murmured Denise in bewilderment, her desire to enter The Ladies\' Paradise, growing keener and keener amidst all this display of passion.
ENGLISH    \"The deuce!\" said he, in the corridor leading to the kitchen, on reaching the black-board on which the bill of fare was inscribed, \"you can see it\'s stock-taking day.
FRENCH   D\'habitude, il prononçait sur ces sortes de vols, commis par des personnes honorables.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s my confounded knees,\" he exclaimed.
FRENCH   Alors, Mme Aurélie, s\'étant approchée de Mlle de Fontenailles, qui n\'avait pas même tourné la tête, parut mécontente de ses additions, et lui dit à demi-voix:  -- Allez donc aider aux paquets...
ENGLISH   \"Furnished room to let.\" It was the first that did not frighten her, so poor was the aspect of the house.
ENGLISH   And as she also took no notice of him, he added between his teeth, so as not to be heard: \"A set of jades!\"  He was certainly not fond of them, tired to death as he was by climbing the stairs to bring them customers and furious at the profits which he accused them of taking out of his pocket.
FRENCH   On dut la voir, tous se dispersèrent avec des rires.
ENGLISH   The pins having run short, she said to him:  \"Look, my dear, in the ivory box on the dressing-table.
FRENCH   Ensuite, elle donna les six chemises; et, Jean ayant dit qu\'ils allaient maintenant aux mouchoirs, elle appela aussi une auxiliaire, pour porter ces chemises et le paletot laissé par l\'auxiliaire des confections.
FRENCH   À toutes ces insinuations, Mme Guibal répondait tranquillement, de son air assuré de femme reine, que les portières ne lui plaisaient plus, sans daigner ajouter une explication.
ENGLISH   No one cared for her, and the sudden thought of Mouret had just deprived her of all resignation.
FRENCH   Ces demoiselles complétaient la ressemblance, vêtues de leur soie réglementaire, promenant leurs grâces marchandes, sans jamais s\'asseoir sur la douzaine de chaises réservées aux clientes seules.
ENGLISH   And thereupon Madame Aurélie abruptly called Denise.
FRENCH   Fallait-il que ces gredins volassent le monde, pour payer cinquante mille francs une chose qui n\'en valait pas dix mille! Et il défendait sa boutique comme une fille honnête défend sa vertu, au nom de l\'honneur, par respect de lui-même.
FRENCH   Jamais je n\'ai eu de chance, je sais que je ne puis être heureux.
ENGLISH   So when the second-hand returned from his holiday there was a general grumbling.
FRENCH   Justement, une cliente poussait la porte, Mme Bourdelais, une des dernières fidèles du Vieil Elbeuf, où elle trouvait des articles solides; depuis longtemps, Mme de Boves avait suivi la mode, en passant au Bonheur, Mme Marty elle-même ne venait plus, conquise tout entière par les séductions des étalages d\'en face.
FRENCH   Moi, je tremble, quand j\'en prends douze, et à quatre-vingt-dix jours...
ENGLISH    There was a vast development of bright, fresh polychromatic architecture enriched with gilding, symbolical of the tumult and sparkle of the business inside, and attracting attention like a gigantic window-display flaming with the liveliest colours.
ENGLISH   They had, at first, experienced great difficulty in laying the foundations, for they had come upon sewer deposits and loose earth, full of human bones; besides which the boring of the well--a well three hundred feet deep--destined to yield two hundred gallons a minute had made the neighbours very anxious.
ENGLISH   \"Ah, Paul, you\'re not changed.
ENGLISH    \"Now, what are we going to do?\" asked Baugé, when the coffee was served.
FRENCH   Elle reprit doucement:  -- Si vous saviez, depuis dix ans je suis accoutumée à l\'idée de ce mariage.
FRENCH   Elle sembla contrariée de la rencontre.
FRENCH   C\'était l\'écrasement de l\'après-midi, près de cent mille clientes s\'étouffant dans les galeries et dans les halls.
FRENCH   Mouret, d\'habitude, s\'emportait, lorsqu\'on lui recommandait des filles du monde pauvres; il n\'y avait pas, disait-il, de créatures plus incapables, plus insupportables, d\'un esprit plus faux; et, d\'ailleurs, on ne pouvait s\'improviser vendeuse, il fallait un apprentissage, c\'était un métier complexe et délicat.
ENGLISH   It was precisely this fear which had prompted him to seek an alliance between himself and the Baron under Henriette\'s auspices.
ENGLISH   Marguerite, the best saleswoman after Denise, had for her part made four thousand five hundred francs, that is fifteen hundred francs salary and about three thousand francs commission; whilst Clara had not made two thousand five hundred altogether.
FRENCH   Et, tout de suite, il plaisanta avec Bouthemont, dont le père, débarqué l\'avant-veille de sa petite boutique de Montpellier, avait failli étouffer de stupeur et d\'indignation, en tombant dans le hall énorme où régnait son fils.
FRENCH    -- Pas mal, je crois, répondit Mme Marty, effarée par cette brusque question, qui tombait méchamment dans sa fièvre dépensière.
FRENCH   Je suis prête à vous faire des excuses, s\'il l\'exige.
ENGLISH   Very often Dumonteil barely makes four sous a yard out of it.
ENGLISH   But she suffered still more from her shoes, heavy shoes which she had brought from Valognes; lack of money preventing her from replacing them by light boots.
FRENCH    -- Mais les femmes.
ENGLISH   She had then asked for three pairs of Suèdes, and was now trying on some Saxon gloves, for fear the size should not be exact.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! c\'est vous, dit-elle à Denise, avec une amabilité exagérée.
ENGLISH   If you are happy, I shall be happy too.
FRENCH   Elle ne pouvait s\'en détacher, lasse à mourir, retenue par des liens si forts, qu\'elle revenait toujours sur ses pas, s ans besoin, battant les rayons de sa curiosité inassouvie.
FRENCH   Puis, revenant brusquement à Denise:  -- D\'ailleurs, c\'est son affaire, ce n\'est pas la mienne...
ENGLISH   Kiss me once more, for it\'s the last time.\"  The young woman kissed her, still protesting: \"No, no, don\'t despair, all you want is careful nursing, nothing more.\"  But the sick girl smiled, shaking her head in an obstinate way, like one who will not be deceived.
FRENCH   Il levait les yeux vers le plafond noir, il écoutait le silence qui sortait des ténèbres de la petite salle à manger, le coin familial dont il aimait autrefois jusqu\'à l\'odeur enfermée.
FRENCH    Mais un léger sifflement les fit taire.
FRENCH   Elle refusa d\'en voir d\'autres, et il dut s\'incliner, car les vendeurs avaient ordre de reprendre les marchandises, même s\'ils s\'apercevaient qu\'on s\'en fût servi.
ENGLISH   He stopped short, and told Jouve to go and fetch the governor, whilst he remained there.
FRENCH   Cependant, elle ne souffrait pas.
FRENCH   Colomban sommeillait à demi, derrière un comptoir.
FRENCH   Décidément, la peur la prenait, elle se mit à descendre lentement la rue Gaillon, puis la rue Saint-Roch, en attendant que le courage lui revînt.
ENGLISH   He would certainly come to grief: Gaujean had burdened him with a very heavy business, in which they would both suffer.
FRENCH    Le baron lui posa les deux mains sur les épaules, le regarda d\'un air paternel.
ENGLISH   After Madame Hédouin\'s death he had sworn never to marry again; having derived from a woman his first good fortune, he resolved in future to draw his fortune from all women.
ENGLISH   The lookers-on were grinning, listening to this adventure.
ENGLISH   Certain things came back to his mind.
ENGLISH   Why had she, before aught else, thought of the suppositions with which this unhoped-for favour would be received? And she remained there full of confusion, despite her sudden burst of gratitude.
FRENCH   Mme Guibal elle-même s\'exaltait.
FRENCH   Bon débarras! les coups de balai font de la place! Seuls, quand ils se rencontraient, à travers la cohue des rayons, Deloche et Pauline échangeaient des mots navrés, regrettant Denise, si douce, si honnête.
FRENCH   Elle l\'aperçut, elle se plaignit gaiement, avec un fond d\'irritation réelle, de ces pièges tendus à la tendresse des mères; l\'idée qu\'elle venait de céder aux fièvres de la réclame, la soulevait; et lui, toujours souriant, s\'inclinait, jouissait de ce triomphe.
FRENCH   Une enfant pareille, était-ce possible? Quand elle passait à présent, le vent léger de sa robe lui paraissait si fort, qu\'il chancelait.
FRENCH   Si vous croyez ce que vous dites, je ne veux pas rester une seconde de plus dans la maison.
FRENCH   Alors, dans le rayon, elle isola la jeune fille davantage encore.
FRENCH   Elles restèrent debout, mêlées à la foule des dames qui regardaient les étoffes, les tâtaient, stationnaient là des heures, sans se décider.
ENGLISH   Just tell him I still like him very much, and that if he has cause for complaint he must blame, not me, but the new circumstances of commerce.
FRENCH    Un jour même, la patience lui échappa.
ENGLISH   While she was thus working herself up for the struggle, a tall young man, passing the department, smiled at her; and when she saw that it was Deloche, who had been engaged in the lace department on the previous day, she returned his smile, happy at the friendship which thus presented itself and accepting his recognition as a good omen.
ENGLISH   And after that they would see.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, le dimanche de l\'inventaire, on mettait à réquisition tous les employés capables de tenir une plume: les inspecteurs, les caissiers, les commis aux écritures, jusqu\'aux garçons de magasin; puis les divers rayons se partageaient ces aides d\'un jour, pour bâcler vivement la besogne.
FRENCH   Henriette se tournait, s\'étudiait devant l\'armoire.
FRENCH   Le palais était construit, le temple élevé à la folie dépensière de la mode.
FRENCH    Mouret se contenta de répéter:  -- C\'est bon, nous verrons cela.
ENGLISH   \"All silk, at twenty-nine sous.\"  She did not condescend to answer.
ENGLISH   \"Well!\" he replied laughing, \"perhaps you\'re right.
ENGLISH   The house would then resume its regular working like a well-appointed machine.
FRENCH    -- Elle cherche Robineau, dit Favier.
FRENCH   Puis, la mécanique ne fonctionnant pas assez vite, il avait imaginé un traquenard, où, en quelques jours, il étranglait sans fatigue le nombre de vendeurs condamnés d\'avance.
FRENCH   Il défendait la porte contre elle, il était prêt à lui pardonner, à s\'aveugler, si elle daignait mentir.
FRENCH   Mme Baudu, devant eux, allait de l\'un à l\'autre, inquiète et silencieuse, comme si elle eût deviné là un nouveau malheur.
ENGLISH   When she felt she was dying, she still found strength to insist on her husband opening both windows.
FRENCH   Lentement, ils suivirent la galerie des châles, marchant côte à côte, l\'un penché et parlant très bas, l\'autre écoutant, sans qu\'un trait de son visage sévère laissât voir ses impressions.
FRENCH    Il avait une gaieté d\'enfant.
FRENCH   On ne tirerait jamais rien d\'un laideron pareil, il l\'avait toujours dit; et il semblait satisfaire une rancune.
FRENCH    -- Merci, vous êtes bonne, disait Geneviève.
ENGLISH   There\'s the perfumery department upstairs, I must see that.\"  This department, created the day before, was next door to the reading-room.
FRENCH    -- La rue de la Michodière, monsieur?  Quand on la lui eut indiquée, la première à droite, tous trois revinrent sur leurs pas, en tournant autour du magasin.
FRENCH   Enfin, elles arrivèrent, elles passèrent devant le buffet public, où la cohue devenait telle, qu\'un inspecteur devait refréner les appétits, en ne laissant plus entrer la clientèle gloutonne que par petits groupes.
FRENCH    The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the phrase \"Project Gutenberg\" appears, or with which the phrase \"Project Gutenberg\" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever.
ENGLISH   She is too respectable for that.
FRENCH   Mais, quand on est tranquillement avec quelqu\'un, et qu\'on n\'a aucun reproche à s\'adresser...
ENGLISH   He was seduction itself.
FRENCH    Son désespoir était de grossir, elle se serrait dans des toilettes de soie noire, afin de dissimuler l\'embonpoint qui montait.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! entrons, reprit Mme Guibal.
FRENCH   Puis, il repartit violemment, il croyait à la toute-puissance de sa volonté.
ENGLISH   Pauline had amicably called her a great simpleton; the others would laugh at her if she refused the invitation; Madame Aurélie, who had gone away, Marguerite, whose rising voice she could hear, Lhomme, whom she could espy, sitting motionless and discreet, all these people were wishing for her fall.
FRENCH   Mais elle se hâtait tellement, dans son émotion, qu\'elle ne s\'arrêta point à ces détails de coquetterie.
FRENCH    Puis, se tournant vers Denise, dont il connaissait l\'engagement nouveau:  -- Toi aussi, ils t\'ont reprise...
FRENCH    -- Tout ça, ce sont des fantasmagories.
FRENCH    -- Ma foi! répondit Mouret joyeusement, tout ce que je demande, c\'est qu\'il ne me gêne pas...
ENGLISH   At last they arrived, passing before the public refreshment bar, where the crowd was becoming so great that an inspector had to restrain the outburst of appetite by only allowing the gluttonous customers to enter in small groups.
FRENCH   Pauline, attristée un instant par la vue de son omelette qui était trop cuite, reprenait sa gaieté, en ne la trouvant pas trop mauvaise.
FRENCH   Est-ce que ce garçon était fou, de s\'entremettre pour donner des travaux supplémentaires aux vendeuses? La maison payait assez cher le temps de ces demoiselles; si elles travaillaient à leur compte la nuit, elles travaillaient moins dans le jour au magasin, c\'était clair; elles les volaient donc, elles risquaient leur santé qui ne leur appartenait pas.
FRENCH    -- Alors, il n\'y a personne? demanda Hutin.
ENGLISH    The door closed.
FRENCH   Il étudiait Mouret.
FRENCH   Elle eut un geste désolé, elle répondait visiblement que la vente ne s\'allumait pas.
FRENCH   Que d\'autres auraient voulu être à sa place! D\'ailleurs, si la chose ne lui plaisait pas, c\'était bien simple: elle n\'avait qu\'à dire non, sans se chagriner si fort.
ENGLISH   The lines were incessantly reforming amidst the calls of the messengers and the pushing of the animals, which closed in of their own accord, whilst fresh vehicles kept on arriving and taking their places with the rest.
ENGLISH   Then, when she got into the street, and again found her daughter, whom she had lost for a moment, the fresh air made her shiver, and she remained quite scared, her mind unhinged by the neurosis to which the great drapery establishments give birth.
ENGLISH   From the day of entering the establishment the young man had counted on this marriage.
ENGLISH   She doesn\'t care a fig for you!\"  \"She cares a deuced sight more for me than I do for her!\" replied the vexed salesman.
FRENCH   Ah! je ne suis pas méchant, mais ce jour-là, j\'illumine, parole d\'honneur!  Il poursuivit d\'une voix vengeresse, on eût dit que la chute du Bonheur des Dames devait rétablir la dignité du commerce compromise.
FRENCH   En juillet comme en décembre, on y étouffait, dans la buée chaude, chargée d\'odeurs nauséabondes, que soufflait le voisinage de la cuisine.
ENGLISH   A perfect torrent of material, a billowy cascade fell from above, spreading out more and more as it neared the floor.
ENGLISH   However that would soon come right again, she thought.
FRENCH   Il y avait des poussées d\'épaules, une bousculade fiévreuse autour des casiers et des corbeilles, où des articles au rabais, dentelles à dix centimes, rubans à cinq sous, jarretières à trois sous, gants, jupons, cravates, chaussettes et bas de coton s\'éboulaient, disparaissaient, comme mangés par une foule vorace.
FRENCH   Et il raillait les désespérés, les dégoûtés, les pessimistes, tous ces malades de nos sciences commençantes, qui prenaient des airs pleureurs de poètes ou des mines pincées de sceptiques, au milieu de l\'immense chantier contemporain.
FRENCH   Alors l\'oncle, baissant la voix, essaya de parler d\'autre chose.
ENGLISH   Bourras, in despair, repeated that art was done for, that he was reduced to carving his handles for the pleasure of doing so, without any hope of selling them.
ENGLISH    When Mouret received her resignation, he remained mute and cold, in the effort which he made to contain himself.
ENGLISH   \"Come in.\"  But a sudden instinct warned the inspector.
ENGLISH   Excuse me if I insist, but things have come to such a pass that something must really be done.\"  Robineau, who had just come in, passed by the group with a bow, on his way to the table.
ENGLISH   And on the floor was sixteen million francs\' worth of goods, a rising sea, which had finished by submerging the tables and counters.
FRENCH   Peu à peu, cependant, le flot les prenait; et elles n\'eurent qu\'à s\'abandonner au courant, elles passèrent la porte comme soulevées, sans en avoir conscience, causant plus fort pour s\'entendre.
FRENCH   Son enfance, passée dans les verdures grasses du Cotentin, s\'éveillait, avec le regret du soleil.
FRENCH    Elle devenait très rouge, son coeur était sur ses lèvres, et elle sentait le mensonge impossible, avec cette émotion qui la trahissait, cette répugnance à mentir qui mettait quand même la vérité sur son visage.
ENGLISH   The newspapers took the matter up, Bourdoncle himself, though staggered by these innovations, was obliged to bow before the immense advertisement.
ENGLISH   To what idea had he yielded on seeing her with her brothers? It was maddening to think that he could no longer find the strength to assert his will.
ENGLISH   Was this fellow mad to interfere with the saleswomen and procure them extra work? The house paid dearly enough for the women\'s time; if they worked on their own account at night they must work less during the daytime in the shop, that was certain; therefore it was a robbery, they were risking their health which did not belong to them.
ENGLISH    \"What! Is that you?\"  \"Yes, it\'s I, rather knocked about though.\"  \"What a crowd--eh? One can\'t get about.
FRENCH   C\'était Mouret, qui avait dîné sur la rive gauche et qui se hâtait de se rendre à pied chez Mme Desforges.
FRENCH   Elle vieillissait donc, qu\'on la trompait pour la première fille venue? La glace reflétait le rayon entier, avec sa turbulence; mais elle ne voyait que sa face pâle, elle n\'entendait pas, derrière elle, Clara qui racontait à Marguerite une des cachotteries de Mme Frédéric, la façon dont celle-ci faisait le tour, matin et soir, en enfilant le passage Choiseul, afin de donner l\'idée qu\'elle logeait peut-être sur la rive gauche.
ENGLISH   But what can that matter, if in return we attract all the women here, and keep them at our mercy, fascinated, maddened by the sight of our goods, emptying their purses without thinking? The principal thing, my dear fellow, is to inflame them, and for that purpose you must have an article which will flatter them and cause a sensation.
FRENCH   Je buvais tranquillement mon bock...
ENGLISH   To maintain their position they were now obliged to do everything themselves.
ENGLISH   We are boarded and lodged, it\'s true; but there\'s our dress; besides, it\'s impossible to go without a copper in one\'s pocket and shut oneself up in one\'s room, watching the flies.
FRENCH   Sa langue s\'embarrassait, l\'écrasement de l\'existence retombait sur ses épaules.
FRENCH   Et elle pliait toujours, lorsque Mouret parut.
ENGLISH   Well! go, my dear, don\'t stand on ceremony with us.\"  Henriette assumed a look of disdainful unconcern.
FRENCH   Nous ne voulons pas t\'influencer...
FRENCH    Aux confections, les vendeuses perdaient la tête.
ENGLISH   And she had refused, and still refused! For him it was a stupor, a struggle in which his desire became rageful.
ENGLISH   The knowing ones staked a lunch on it all ending in a marriage; yet, the others, those who believed in her departure, did not risk their money without good reasons.
FRENCH   Prenez quelqu\'un, ce sera beaucoup mieux.
ENGLISH   You can put it in your drawing-room, keep it for a time and then if you don\'t like it, return it.\"  \"Ah! that\'s a good idea!\" exclaimed Madame Marty.
FRENCH   Vous y seriez bien...
FRENCH   Pépé, jusque-là très sage, se conduisit mal devant les confitures.
FRENCH    -- Prenez garde, monsieur! mon mari ira jusqu\'au ministre.
FRENCH    Un instant, Mme Marty hésita.
ENGLISH   The woman was there, quietly putting on her things again.
FRENCH   Baugé venait de demander l\'addition, en voyant que Denise n\'allait pas mieux, toute blanche, le menton convulsé par les larmes qu\'elle retenait; mais le garçon ne reparaissait plus, et elle dut subir encore les éclats de voix de Hutin.
FRENCH    -- Dites, pourquoi refusez-vous?...
ENGLISH   Tenanting the whole house, he under-let the two upper floors furnished, in order to lighten the rent.
FRENCH    -- Messieurs, finit-elle par dire, je vous laisse causer.
FRENCH    Mais Bourdoncle restait grave, les lèvres pincées.
FRENCH   Depuis près de cent ans, le Vieil Elbeuf est connu, et il n\'a pas besoin à sa porte de pareils attrape-nigauds.
FRENCH    Denise redevint toute blanche.
FRENCH   Ce qu\'elle ne lui aurait jamais pardonné, c\'était son mensonge d\'autrefois, sa froideur d\'amant sous la comédie galante de ses prévenances.
FRENCH    Il demeurait béant, jamais il n\'aurait cru que ce serait fini si vite.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle se sentit condamné, balayé dans cette victoire de la femme.
ENGLISH   \"My dear fellow, it\'s beyond all imagination,\" said he.
ENGLISH    \"Yes, sir,\" she replied once more; and as she did so she blushed, thinking of the abominable inventions circulated by Marguerite and Clara.
ENGLISH   In the meantime, he treated her on a footing of perfect equality, for he no longer disdained her, feeling that she was strong enough to overthrow even himself notwithstanding his ten years\' service, should he lose the game.
FRENCH   Elle avait beau être courageuse, lutter de toute sa gaieté et de toute sa raison, pour ne pas céder aux crises de sa nature tendre: des larmes l\'aveuglaient dès qu\'elle avait refermé la porte de sa chambre, elle se désolait en se voyant à la rue, fâchée avec son oncle, ne sachant où aller, sans un sou d\'économie, et ayant sur les bras les deux enfants.
ENGLISH    \"Your name?\" asked Madame Aurélie, standing at the end of a counter, pen in hand, ready to write.
ENGLISH   Sometimes there were fully fifty little girls and as many boys there, quite a turbulent school, all agog with the desires of budding coquetry.
FRENCH    La dentelle passa de main en main.
ENGLISH   But this self-confession suddenly filled her with confusion, and a burning flush of shame suffused her face.
FRENCH   Mme Guibal lui accorda à peine un coup d\'oeil.
FRENCH   Il tenait de sa bonne main une grande sacoche de cuir, et son bras mutilé serrait contre sa poitrine un portefeuille énorme; tandis que, derrière son dos, son fils Albert portait une charge de sacs, qui lui cassait les membres.
FRENCH   Après avoir hésité près d\'une heure dans la rue, en proie à une terrible crise de timidité, elle venait de se décider enfin.
ENGLISH   She observed it, and complained gaily, though with an undercurrent of real irritation, of these traps laid for a mother\'s affection; the idea that she had just yielded to the force of puffery raised her indignation, and he, still smiling, bowed, fully enjoying his triumph.
FRENCH   L\'exposition des ombrelles, aux rondeurs de bouclier, jetait des reflets de métal.
FRENCH   Depuis longtemps, Mouret caressait le rêve de réaliser son ancien projet, l\'envahissement de l\'îlot entier par le Bonheur des Dames, de la rue Monsigny à la rue de la Michodière, et de la rue Neuve Saint-Augustin à la rue du Dix-Décembre.
FRENCH   Vraiment, ces méprises sont épouvantables.
ENGLISH   A silent throng surrounded the table, which was littered with reviews and newspapers, with here and there some ink-stands, boxes of stationery, and blotting-pads.
FRENCH    -- Je ne vous dis point de vous mal conduire, au moins! reprit- elle vivement.
FRENCH   Mais, justement, Denise passait.
ENGLISH   You don\'t seem to understand! That isn\'t it, there\'s the ruck showing again.
FRENCH   Sacré mâtin! la première qui passe, je la tombe de vingt mètres de Paris-Bonheur!  Un moment encore, ils causèrent, ils se dirent ce qu\'ils avaient fait la veille et ce qu\'ils comptaient faire dans huit jours.
FRENCH   Quelques phrases avaient suffi, il devinait le reste, et une exploitation si galante l\'échauffait, remuait en lui son passé de viveur.
FRENCH   Tu entends, Denise; j\'ai là soixante-dix mille francs qui vont faire passer des nuits blanches à ton Mouret...
ENGLISH   It seemed as though her pile of hair was weighing down her neck.
FRENCH   Elle tâcherait de lui parler, l\'après-midi; et elle continua de suivre le corridor, pour se rendre à sa table, qui se trouvait à l\'autre bout.
FRENCH    Le dimanche où les Lhomme donnèrent l\'argent, ils voulurent bien dîner au Vieil Elbeuf.
FRENCH    -- C\'est une plaisanterie, mademoiselle.
FRENCH    -- Oh! intervint Mme Aurélie, il faudrait le voir sur madame elle- même...
ENGLISH   Then, when his perpetual walking brought him to the other end, he gazed at the gloom-enveloped shelves, on which a few pieces of cloth were growing more and more mouldy.
ENGLISH   He gazed at her with his paternal, and at the same time inquisitive, air.
FRENCH    -- Vous vous fâchez? dit une voix derrière Denise.
ENGLISH   The Paradise seemed like a red-hot furnace, in which the various displays--the palaces of gloves and cravats, the festoons of ribbons and laces, the lofty piles of linen and calico, the variegated parterres in which bloomed the light silks and foulards--were now burning.
FRENCH   Pendant quelques minutes malgré le gros du travail, le rayon échangea des hypothèses.
ENGLISH   He who had struggled for months, who even that morning had sworn to stifle his passion, all at once yielded, seized by the vertigo which overcomes one on mountain heights, happy to commit what he looked upon as folly.
FRENCH    Lentement, elle reculait, elle cherchait à saluer, pour continuer sa promenade.
FRENCH   Et, brusquement:  -- Donnez-nous donc votre avis, Monsieur Mouret.
ENGLISH    The cold wind that blew had already dried the pavement.
ENGLISH   What\'s the matter with your feet?\"  On the day when Denise came down wearing a pair of cloth boots, which had cost her five francs, Marguerite and Clara expressed their astonishment in a kind of half whisper, so as to be heard.
ENGLISH   Most of them hurried along alone, and vanished into the warehouse, without addressing a word or look to their colleagues marching along around them.
ENGLISH   The cholera\'s even spread as far as the Rue Sainte-Anne.
FRENCH   Si le mari m\'assassine, tu seras bien débarrassée.
FRENCH   On s\'en va à pas de tortue dans la vie, lorsque les autres, ceux qui ont les pieds nus, courent comme des dératés.
FRENCH   Et, comme un aide de cuisine apportait de grands plats de fer-blanc, Hutin s\'écria:  -- Du riz au gratin, c\'est complet!  -- Bon pour deux sous de colle! dit Favier en se servant.
ENGLISH   On Mouret speaking of his marriage with Mademoiselle de Boves, he replied that despite the obstinacy of the aunt in refusing to die, the matter was about to be concluded; at least, he thought so, the parents were agreed, and he affected to have no will of his own.
FRENCH   Maintenant, ils la voyaient, avec son plafond bas et enfumé, ses comptoirs de chêne polis par l\'usage, ses casiers séculaires aux fortes ferrures.
ENGLISH   \"The theatres don\'t close so early.\"  Denise however felt uncomfortable in that bachelor\'s room and a quarter of an hour later she contrived to slip away.
FRENCH    -- Qu\'avez-vous? demanda vivement Pauline, quand elle remarqua le trouble de la jeune fille.
FRENCH   Longtemps, il la pressa de questions, avec une anxiété croissante; et la dignité muette de cette vierge semblait une fois encore le calcul savant d\'une femme rompue à la tactique de la passion.
ENGLISH   The door remained open, and she felt that the whole shop was urging her on to ruin.
ENGLISH   A fresh silence reigned.
FRENCH   Quant à Mme Aurélie, elle était blessée de la réserve fière de la jeune fille, qui ne tournait pas autour de sa jupe d\'un air d\'admiration caressante; aussi l\'abandonnait-elle aux rancunes de ses favorites, des préférées de sa Cour, toujours agenouillées, occupées à la nourrir d\'une flatterie continue, dont sa forte personne autoritaire avait besoin pour s\'épanouir.
FRENCH   Victor, une troisième confiture!  Le garçon achevait de servir les desserts.
ENGLISH   However, the conversation continued; and Hutin, standing there waiting their good pleasure, could have slapped their faces for all the time they were making him lose.
ENGLISH    He had the icy tone and rigid demeanour which he now assumed with her.
FRENCH   Cependant, sous cette froideur, si peu habituelle chez lui, Mouret cachait une crise affreuse d\'indécision et de souffrance.
ENGLISH   Pépé seemed to be listening with the attentive air of a precocious child.
FRENCH   Elle maigrissait, elle engraissait, elle avait bien dormi ou elle devait s\'être couchée tard, la veille; et chaque petit fait de sa vie inconnue, événements du dehors, drames de l\'intérieur, avait de la sorte un contrecoup, longuement commenté.
ENGLISH   As they passed before the refreshment bar, Madame Bourdelais did not fail to gorge her little family with syrup.
ENGLISH   \"My good Lhomme, put it down there, and take a rest, for you look quite done up.
FRENCH   Même le lundi matin, une heure avant l\'ouverture, des marchandises ne se trouvaient pas encore en place.
ENGLISH   Then, at ten o\'clock, came the board-meeting, quite a cabinet council composed of the twelve directors, at which he had to preside; they discussed matters affecting the in-door arrangements, examined the purchases, settled the window displays; and yet she was still there, he heard her soft voice amidst the figures, he saw her bright smile amidst the most complicated financial situations.
FRENCH   Mais la vente se portait ailleurs, les clientes y étaient relativement clairsemées.
ENGLISH   Why had she no lover? It astonished people and seemed ridiculous.
ENGLISH   Fits of anger brought the blood seething to his head: he saw red, he dreamed of taking Denise in a close embrace, keeping her, and stifling her cries.
ENGLISH   Madame Baudu and Geneviève, had cast down their eyes with an air of resignation.
FRENCH   À quoi songeait Bouthemont? Il s\'éloigna, en déclarant qu\'il n\'admettait pas qu\'un acheteur manquât de flair, jusqu\'à commettre la bêtise de s\'approvisionner au-delà des besoins de la vente.
ENGLISH    \"What\'s the matter?\" asked her friend.
FRENCH    -- Venez à la soie, dit Mme Desforges.
FRENCH   Maintenant, la trépidation intérieure étouffait les bruits du dehors; on n\'entendait plus ni le roulement des fiacres, ni le battement des portières; il ne restait, au-delà du grand murmure de la vente, que le sentiment de Paris immense, d\'une immensité qui toujours fournirait des acheteuses.
FRENCH   La jeune fille sentait bien la volonté de la traiter en servante, dans ces caprices de cliente impérieuse; seulement, elle s\'était juré de rester à son devoir, elle gardait son attitude calme, malgré les bonds de son coeur et les révoltes de sa fierté.
FRENCH    -- C\'est inouï! ajoutait la jeune fille, avec sa hardiesse de femme.
FRENCH    Lorsque Mouret eut repris sa place sur le canapé, près du baron Hartmann, il se répandit en nouveaux éloges à propos des opérations du Crédit Immobilier.
FRENCH   Des couronnes de perles, un gros bouquet de roses blanches, couvraient le cercueil, un cercueil étroit de fillette, posé sur l\'allée obscure de la maison, au ras du trottoir, si près du ruisseau, que les voitures avaient déjà éclaboussé les draperies.
FRENCH   Sans doute, elle cédait au besoin invincible de voir et de souffrir.
ENGLISH    \"Come, give us some particulars,\" repeated Madame de Boves, persistently.
ENGLISH    \"Ah, they make you wild, don\'t they?\" said Pauline to her one morning.
FRENCH    Lorsque Mouret rentra dans son cabinet, il étouffait de sanglots contenus.
FRENCH   Puis, les faiblesses de Mme Marty recommencèrent: elle succomba successivement devant un corset de satin noir, des manchettes de fourrure vendues au rabais, à cause de la saison, des dentelles russes dont on garnissait alors le linge de table.
ENGLISH    It was as if the colossus, after each enlargement, full of shame and repugnance for the dingy district in which it had modestly sprung up, and which it had subsequently slaughtered, had just turned its back to it, leaving the mud of the narrow streets behind, and presenting its upstart face to the noisy, sunny thoroughfares of new Paris.
FRENCH   Puis, un drame bouleversa la lingerie, où une acheteuse s\'était trouvée mal, en accusant la demoiselle qui la servait de manger de l\'ail; et celle-ci fut chassée sur l\'heure, bien que, peu nourrie et toujours affamée, elle achevât simplement au comptoir toute une provision de croûtes de pain.
FRENCH   Je vous ai appelé, et comme vous étiez là derrière...
FRENCH   D\'habitude, il préférait ne pas se mêler de ces sortes d\'aventures, qui étaient fréquentes; car, malgré le fonctionnement de machine bien réglée, un grand désordre régnait dans certains rayons du Bonheur des Dames, et il ne se passait pas de semaine, sans qu\'on chassât un employé pour vol.
ENGLISH    \"Hush! Madame Aurélie!\" she murmured.
ENGLISH   Meantime their box had arrived, and it was arranged that they should sleep in the attic.
ENGLISH   Madame Boutarel was obliged to come out, to the delight of the crowd, which was discussing and laughing over the affair.
FRENCH   Quand Mme Desforges comprit qu\'ils ne se trahiraient pas, elle chercha autre chose, elle inventa de sourire à Mouret, de l\'afficher comme son amant.
ENGLISH   By increasing their business tenfold and popularizing luxury, they--the drapers--became a terrible instrument of prodigality, ravaging households, and preparing mad freaks of fashion which proved ever more and more costly.
ENGLISH   And if you fear that I should return to her, you may feel quite easy: she is avenging herself by helping one of our former salesmen to found a rival establishment.
FRENCH   Oui, je connais quelqu\'un qu\'elle a voulu prendre de force.
FRENCH   Est-ce qu\'on sait comment les choses se répandent!  Lorsque Deloche se décida à boire un verre d\'eau, toute la table éclata encore.
ENGLISH    He smiled, and looked at her with paternal indulgence.
FRENCH   Du reste, sa vie était assez douce, malgré sa fatigue et son peu d\'argent.
ENGLISH   But he felt very doubtful, and tried to interest Denise in the matter, aware, no doubt, of her powerful influence.
ENGLISH   Oh! it\'s curious, very curious!\"  At last he came to the delicate point.
FRENCH   Elle était là, patiente, seule, redoutable dans sa douceur.
FRENCH   Déjà, la façade, sortie du sol, indiquait le vaste porche, les baies du premier étage, un développement de palais à l\'état d\'ébauche.
FRENCH    -- Mademoiselle Cugnot, voyez donc cette crinière, répétait Clara, que Marguerite poussait du coude, en feignant aussi d\'étouffer de rire.
FRENCH   Donnez votre main, tâtez les épaules, par plaisir.
FRENCH   Encore fut-il heureux de trouver les Lhomme, ses voisins, que le désir d\'augmenter leurs terres détermina.
ENGLISH   As Denise avoided the slightest expense, she went to bed early.
FRENCH   Une insomnie traversée de cauchemars, la retournait sous la couverture.
FRENCH   C\'était bien cela, elles se trouvaient comme en partie fine au Bonheur, elles y sentaient une continuelle caresse de flatterie, une adoration épandue qui retenait les plus honnêtes.
FRENCH   En somme, c\'était Robineau qui avait tous les torts, car il aurait dû la détourner, lui, un ancien commis au courant des habitudes de la maison.
FRENCH   C\'était la femme que les magasins se disputaient par la concurrence, la femme qu\'ils prenaient au continuel piège de leurs occasions, après l\'avoir étourdie devant leurs étalages.
ENGLISH   If you put yourself in my hands, you may be sure I\'ll make nothing but a good man of you!\"  She smiled, with that simple unassuming air which possessed such a charm.
ENGLISH   The old man thereupon fetched a key from a shelf in the back-shop, a small dark room, where he did his cooking and had his bed; beyond it, through a dirty window, you could espy a back-yard about six feet square.
FRENCH   Toujours Denise le possédait.
FRENCH   C\'était, aux trousseaux, le déballage indiscret, la femme retournée et vue par le bas, depuis la petite-bourgeoise aux toiles unies, jusqu\'à la dame riche blottie dans les dentelles, une alcôve publiquement ouverte, dont le luxe caché, les plissés, les broderies, les valenciennes, devenait comme une dépravation sensuelle, à mesure qu\'il débordait davantage en fantaisies coûteuses.
ENGLISH   Hutin was quite right, she simply wanted some patterns with the prices; and she detained the salesman more than ten minutes, overwhelming him with questions.
ENGLISH   She was awfully melancholy, and her eyes were so red!\"  A silence ensued.
FRENCH    -- Vraiment, répétait-il, vous les croyez sages?  Mouret défendait leur vertu avec une conviction qui faisait rire Vallagnosc.
ENGLISH   They related scores of stories about him; one poor little fellow had fallen ill through his treatment, and even lady customers had been humiliated by his curt remarks.
FRENCH   La bataille recommençait en lui, car ce rendez-vous donné l\'irritait maintenant.
ENGLISH   As for loving you, you can\'t prevent me, can you? I shall love you like a dog.
FRENCH   Et ce malin de Bouthemont qui venait de prendre pour lui l\'envoyée de Mme Sauveur, cette femme maigre avec laquelle il causait! une belle affaire, deux ou trois douzaines de pièces, car la grande couturière avait les bouchées grosses.
FRENCH   Déjà Mouret s\'était éloigné, tandis que Denise se perdait au fond du rayon, accompagnée de ses frères, toujours à la recherche d\'un vendeur libre.
ENGLISH   He cut it up with trembling hands; and no longer showed his accurate glance, his deft skill in weighing the portions.
ENGLISH   And more white hung from the arches, a fall of down, a sheet of large snowy flakes; white counterpanes, white coverlets hovered in the air, like banners in a church; long jets of guipure lace hung across, suggestive of swarms of white motionless butterflies; other laces fluttered on all sides, floating like gossamer in a summer sky, filling the air with their white breath.
ENGLISH    That same evening Mouret sent for the young woman to speak to her about a child\'s garment which he wished to launch, a mixture of the Scotch and Zouave costumes.
FRENCH   Il avait blêmi davantage, toute sa personne exprimait l\'angoisse résignée d\'un pauvre homme, qui assiste à la débâcle de ses appointements, si chèrement gagnés.
ENGLISH   The misfortune is, that his duties call him to the four corners of France, to the breeding dépôts, so that he has frequent pretexts for absenting himself.
ENGLISH   On emerging from the darkness of the trees this was like a sudden awakening.
FRENCH   Et, comme Mme Bourdelais lui demandait si elle était venue faire des emplettes, elle répondit de son air de langueur, en éteignant de ses paupières l\'âpreté égoïste de son regard:  -- Oh! non...
ENGLISH   You don\'t understand this language, old man, otherwise you would know that action contains its own recompense.
FRENCH   Mme Desforges, pour éviter l\'encombrement des escaliers, parla de prendre l\'ascenseur; mais elles durent y renoncer, on faisait queue à la porte de l\'appareil.
FRENCH   Elle restait surprise elle-même de la vivacité de sa défense.
FRENCH   Mais il avait déjà commandité deux amis d\'Henriette, il se lassait un peu de son faste de protecteur complaisant.
FRENCH   Alors, Denise appela Marguerite, pour débarrasser le rayon de l\'article, un modèle de l\'année précédente, que cette dernière, sur un coup d\'oeil de sa camarade, présenta comme une occasion exceptionnelle.
FRENCH   Dès six heures, les tables manquèrent, les promeneurs se hâtaient, cherchaient un coin; et les garçons apportaient toujours des chaises, des bancs, rapprochaient les assiettes, entassaient le monde.
ENGLISH   At all events we can\'t be worse off than we were at Valognes.\"  She said nothing about a certain love affair of Jean\'s, of certain letters which he had written to the daughter of a nobleman of the town, of the kisses which the pair had exchanged over a wall--in fact, quite a scandal which had strengthened her in her determination to leave.
ENGLISH    \"He\'s a charming fellow,\" said the baron.
ENGLISH   Madame Baudu had just come back with Pépé, whom Madame Gras had agreed to receive at any time.
ENGLISH   After that I remember nothing.
ENGLISH   \"My stars! you\'re too good! It just happens, there\'s the----\"  \"Not another word,\" Denise would say; \"I don\'t want to know.\"  Three months passed away, spring was coming back.
FRENCH   Seulement, il faut vendre, et j\'en reviens à ma question: à qui vendrez-vous? comment espérez-vous entretenir une vente aussi colossale?  Un éclat brusque de voix, venu du salon, coupa les explications de Mouret.
FRENCH    -- Je suis très content de vous avoir rencontrée, finit par balbutier Deloche, qui se décida à parler le premier.
FRENCH    -- Si, dit enfin Blanche de sa voix molle.
FRENCH    Lorsque Denise rentra aux confections, Mme Aurélie laissa Marguerite achever l\'appel des vêtements.
ENGLISH   I can\'t bear to see the same dresses as mine on every woman\'s back.\"  At first Mouret slightly smiled.
ENGLISH   That a saleswoman should be reduced to work at night, seemed to him an attack on the very organization of The Ladies\' Paradise.
ENGLISH   Similar heaps were scattered about in every department; the shelves, the boxes, the cupboards were being gradually emptied, whilst the goods overflowed on all sides, under-foot, between the counters and the tables, in ever rising piles.
FRENCH   Elle se pencha pour murmurer à l\'oreille de Mme Desforges:  -- Hein? n\'aimez-vous pas mieux être servie par des hommes?...
FRENCH   Les tasses fumaient, des visages en sueur luisaient sous les vapeurs légères, flottantes comme des nuées bleues de cigarettes.
ENGLISH   However, he took Madame Desforges\'s _protégée_ placing her in the pattern-room, in the same way as (to oblige friends) he had already found places for two countesses and a baroness in the advertising department, where they addressed wrappers and envelopes.
ENGLISH   The ladies were astonished.
FRENCH    Justement, Bourdoncle, dont Mouret venait de se débarrasser, était là.
ENGLISH   \"If my husband makes too much fuss, I\'ll send everything back.\" This was for her the supreme excuse, she ceased calculating and went on buying, with the secret wish, however, to keep everything, for she was not one of those women who give things back.
FRENCH    -- Non, répéta Denise.
ENGLISH   Some opened the letters and others read them, seated on either side of the same table; others again classified them, giving each one a running number, which was repeated on a pigeon-hole.
ENGLISH   At the desk Madame Baudu and Geneviève stood mute and motionless, as in some solitary spot, where no one would come to disturb them.
FRENCH   Il regardait la jeune fille, qui était restée assise, la plume à la main.
FRENCH   Deloche, lorsque le bruit se répandit, fut tellement indigné, qu\'il parlait de gifler ces demoiselles des confections; et, seule, la crainte de la compromettre le retint.
FRENCH   Les théâtres ne ferment pas si tôt.
FRENCH   Cependant, Baudu sortait le dernier de la petite salle, à la suite de sa femme, qui était allée s\'asseoir sur la banquette de la caisse.
FRENCH   Mais je crois que tu devrais aller donner ton bras à Mme de Boves, ce qui serait plus sage que de faire un scandale...
FRENCH   Mouret!  -- Un drôle de goût, n\'est-ce pas? reprit-il.
FRENCH   Pauline, sans qu\'elle sût pourquoi, lui avait conté en détail les amours du patron et de Clara, où il la voyait, ce qu\'il la payait; et elle en reparlait souvent, elle ajoutait même qu\'il avait une autre maîtresse, cette Mme Desforges, bien connue de tout le magasin.
FRENCH    Debout devant le lit, il était plein de surprise.
ENGLISH   He had no need to know where she was lodging.
ENGLISH   He was getting too close, and was speaking in her face.
FRENCH   Pourtant, après avoir attendu un instant, elle s\'enhardit jusqu\'à poser une nouvelle question.
FRENCH   Il y connaissait une jeune fille, qui était si convenable, que les acheteuses n\'osaient s\'adresser à elle, de peur de l\'humilier.
FRENCH   Longtemps simple commissionnaire, il n\'avait des métiers à lui que depuis cinq ou six ans, et encore faisait-il travailler beaucoup de façonniers, auxquels il fournissait la matière première, et qu\'il payait tant du mètre.
FRENCH   Merci.
ENGLISH   There was a central range, over which, by a system of chains and pullies, a couple of rails fixed to the ceiling brought colossal cauldrons which four men could not have lifted.
FRENCH   Je ne le mangerai pas, votre enfant!  Denise fut plus heureuse chez Robineau.
ENGLISH   In busy moments they took no notice of the turns, each salesman served the customers as they arrived.
ENGLISH   It was Joseph, the messenger, sleeping behind some mourning articles.
ENGLISH   Is she fair, the young lady you were talking about?\"  The manager, who felt rather anxious on finding her so persistent, merely smiled.
ENGLISH   \"Which is the Rue de la Michodière, please, sir?\"  On hearing that it was the first on the right they all turned back, making the tour of the establishment.
ENGLISH   \"What an imagination you have!\"  He shook his head, and continued to smile, resolved not to return confidence for confidence.
FRENCH    -- Comment! de la prudence? Je ne comprends plus...
FRENCH   Quand le petit marchait à quatre pattes, on ne pouvait plus remuer, elle au fond de son coin faisant des raccommodages, lui, devant la vitrine, creusant le bois, à l\'aide de son canif.
FRENCH   Toutes les misères du rayon disparaissaient devant ce désastre.
ENGLISH   Then the beds creaked, the tired occupants yawned, and fell into heavy slumber.
FRENCH   Baugé vous épouse.
FRENCH   Les jugements d\'expropriation étaient rendus, deux bandes de démolisseurs attaquaient déjà la trouée, aux deux bouts, l\'une abattant les vieux hôtels de la rue Louis-le-Grand, l\'autre renversant les murs légers de l\'ancien Vaudeville; et l\'on entendait les pioches qui se rapprochaient, la rue de Choiseul et la rue de la Michodière se passionnaient pour leurs maisons condamnées.
ENGLISH   Denise herself made an effort to remain cold.
ENGLISH   It isn\'t very gallant of you to bury yourself in a corner to talk over business.\"  Thereupon he decided to join the ladies, with an apparent good grace, a well-feigned air of rapture which quite astonished the baron.
FRENCH    -- Tais-toi, interrompait Denise.
FRENCH   Seulement, ce jour-là, Mouret avait le besoin de se fâcher, et il traita violemment le joli Mignot, qui tremblait de peur, la face blême et décomposée.
ENGLISH   But at Denise\'s request, they decided to remain at Joinville all day: it would be droll, they would take a fill of the country.
ENGLISH   \"Who, dear?\"  Geneviève shook her head with an incredulous air.
FRENCH   Toi seul me consoles, car si c\'est une pareille bousculade qu\'on appelle à présent le commerce, je n\'y entends rien, j\'aime mieux m\'en aller.
ENGLISH   _Trans._  \"It\'s a trap,\" cried she, when Bourdoncle and Jouve came in.
FRENCH   Cependant, un besoin de violence le prenait, il finit par s\'emporter contre les vendeurs débandés sous l\'assaut de la clientèle.
ENGLISH   Things are not going well, and my poor darling is worried to death.
FRENCH    -- Non, non, c\'est trop bête...
FRENCH    Et il referma la porte, il marcha jusqu\'à son bureau.
FRENCH   L\'autre mois, il était en tournée d\'inspection, il écrivait à sa femme tous les deux jours, de Blois, de Libourne, de Tarbes; et je suis pourtant convaincu de l\'avoir vu entrer dans une pension bourgeoise des Batignolles...
ENGLISH    One day especially terror reigned supreme.
ENGLISH   Think of it.
ENGLISH   However, Mouret still held her hand and called her his good Henriette, at which she felt her heart melting.
FRENCH   Ah! la pauvre enfant! elle ne pèse plus lourd, allez! Si vous aviez vu ses petits bras! C\'est à pleurer...
FRENCH   C\'était le moucheron écrasé, le dernier triomphe sur l\'obstination cuisante de l\'infiniment petit, toute l\'île envahie et conquise.
FRENCH    -- Justement, voici Robineau, murmura le chef de rayon.
FRENCH   Le niveau de leur moralité montait, d\'ailleurs.
FRENCH   Mme Baudu, qui avait achevé de déjeuner, était debout, toute blanche, ses yeux blancs fixés sur le monstre; et, résignée, elle ne pouvait le voir, le rencontrer ainsi de l\'autre côté de la rue, sans qu\'un désespoir muet gonflât ses paupières.
FRENCH   De toutes ses sensations, deux persistaient et effaçaient peu à peu les autres: le coup porté en elle par Mouret, profond jusqu\'à la peur; puis, l\'amabilité de Hutin, la seule joie de sa matinée, un souvenir d\'une douceur charmante, qui l\'emplissait de gratitude.
FRENCH   J\'ai trop peur toute seule.
FRENCH   Puis, après être sortie la dernière et avoir fait son tour furtif de promenade, toujours seule, elle était rentrée la première, elle travaillait ou se couchait, la tête occupée d\'un rêve, prise de curiosité sur cette existence de Paris, qu\'elle ignorait.
FRENCH    -- Oh! moi, je ne demande pas mieux...
FRENCH   Et son ancienne peur, le frisson qui la glaçait devant lui, éclatait soudain en un besoin ardent de le voir, de ne point quitter la maison, sans lui jurer qu\'elle n\'avait pas appartenu à un autre.
FRENCH    -- Hein? qu\'avez-vous, toutes les deux, pour vous aimer comme ça?  Denise, sans comprendre, était reprise de malaise.
ENGLISH   You can understand, it does not have much effect on this young person, who is so slim.
ENGLISH   The woman who happened to answer was Mademoiselle de Fontenailles, recently married to Joseph.
ENGLISH   It was the hand of Madame Marty, who was being carried through the establishment by her fever for spending.
FRENCH   Ce fut d\'abord la puissance décuplée de l\'entassement, toutes les marchandises accumulées sur un point, se soutenant et se poussant; jamais de chômage; toujours l\'article de la saison était là; et, de comptoir en comptoir, la cliente se trouvait prise, achetait ici l\'étoffe, plus loin le fil, ailleurs le manteau, s\'habillait, puis tombait dans des rencontres imprévues, cédait au besoin de l\'inutile et du joli.
FRENCH    -- C\'est toujours ainsi, dit Favier, qui s\'installait à sa gauche.
FRENCH    -- Imagine-toi, répondit-il, que Thérèse a oublié une foule d\'affaires.
ENGLISH   Thinking you were jealous, I gave up all my pleasures.
ENGLISH   Then Favier resumed in a low voice: \"If she\'s married, perhaps her husband\'s smacked her face.\"  \"Possibly,\" repeated Hutin, \"unless a lover has played her false.\" And after a fresh silence, he added: \"Any way, I don\'t care a hang!\"  At this moment Denise crossed the silk department, slackening her steps and looking around her, in search of Robineau.
FRENCH   Depuis deux mois, Robineau, réduit aux expédients, menait une vie d\'enfer, pour empêcher une déclaration de faillite.
ENGLISH   They were now quite alone, face to face, in the house which ruin had slowly emptied, and their daughter\'s death filled the dark corners with a deeper gloom, and seemed like the beginning of that final dismemberment which would break up the old rafters, preyed upon by damp.
FRENCH   De toutes ces demoiselles, une seule, Pauline Cugnot, lui témoignait quelque tendresse; et encore, les rayons des confections et de la lingerie, installés côte à côte, se trouvant en guerre ouverte, la sympathie des deux vendeuses avait dû jusque-là se borner à de rares paroles, échangées en courant.
ENGLISH   She lowered her voice to say: \"It\'s reported you\'re going to leave us.
FRENCH   La cliente fit un brusque mouvement.
FRENCH    Ce raisonnement acheva d\'étonner la lingère.
ENGLISH   Then on all sides, on every counter there were snowy masses of white Spanish blonde as light as air, Brussels with large flowers on a delicate mesh, hand-made point, and Venice point with heavier designs, Alençon point, and Bruges of royal and almost sacred richness.
FRENCH    Depuis un instant, un gros homme à cheveux blancs et à grande face jaune, debout sur le seuil d\'une boutique, de l\'autre côté de la rue, les regardait.
FRENCH   Madame a besoin de vous.
ENGLISH    Another torment was to have the whole department against her.
FRENCH    -- Vous êtes bien bon, monsieur, balbutia-t-elle.
ENGLISH   I\'m lifted off my feet.
ENGLISH    Favier at last got clear and went up the dining-room staircase.
FRENCH   Tout de suite, il se mit à rire.
FRENCH   Ils nous ont tué notre commerce, et voilà qu\'une de leurs coquines nous tue notre fille.
FRENCH   Et, malgré son bon coeur, ses yeux retournaient toujours au Bonheur des Dames, comme si la vendeuse en elle avait eu le besoin de se réchauffer au flamboiement de cette grande vente.
ENGLISH   Now and then a refreshing breath arose from the floor, which some assistants were gently watering.
ENGLISH   \"But even if she escapes me, you\'ll see what a place I shall build to cure myself.
ENGLISH   There he bowed, and smiled at her, as he smiled at all women.
FRENCH   Ces dames se récriaient.
FRENCH   Baudu battait la retraite du bout des doigts sur la toile cirée.
ENGLISH   And Favier, his eyes sparkling, defended himself with a great show of sympathy.
ENGLISH    \"Yes, they\'re real centipedes,\" retorted another salesman.
FRENCH    Mouret et Bourdoncle avaient traversé la caisse et le bureau de vérification.
ENGLISH   The governor has just been seen casting sheep\'s eyes at her.
FRENCH    Henriette remarqua de quelle heureuse poignée de main Mouret accueillit le nouveau venu.
ENGLISH   We\'re going upstairs.\"  \"No, no, wait for me!\" cried the other, \"I\'m going up too.
ENGLISH   You can put me on a chair, and I\'ll do some writing.\"  Both then went downstairs.
ENGLISH   She looked like a woman who drank, her meagre face had a livid hue, and her hands alone, white and delicate, attested the distinction of her birth.
ENGLISH    \"But it was my brother!\" she cried with the grievous anger of an outraged virgin.
FRENCH    -- En face, en face, balbutia-t-il à plusieurs reprises.
FRENCH   Ce devait être le patron, rentrant de soirée; et l\'idée qu\'il était là, dans le noir, à l\'attendre peut-être, lui causait une de ces peurs étranges, dont il la bouleversait encore, sans motif raisonnable.
FRENCH    -- Et puis, qu\'importe? si tu as fait ce que tu voulais faire, reprenait-elle.
FRENCH   Puis, son voisin, le boulanger, avait voulu rire; celui-là ne rentrait que le matin, la guettait, quand elle allait chercher son eau; il faisait même des trous dans la cloison, la regardait se débarbouiller, ce qui la forçait à pendre ses vêtements le long du mur.
ENGLISH   He had quite forgotten the stock-taking, he no longer beheld his empire, that building bursting with riches.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle had remained on one side, feigning to be interested in the sales; but he did not lose sight of this little scene.
FRENCH    Du coin de l\'oeil, il montrait Bouthemont, qui marchait dans le couloir, entre Mouret et Bourdoncle, tous trois absorbés, parlant à demi-voix, vivement.
ENGLISH   The indiscretion came from Pauline.
FRENCH   Dans le magasin, inondé de soleil par les grandes baies ouvertes, le personnel enfermé venait de commencer l\'inventaire.
FRENCH   Cette robe était encore un peu grande, trop large aux épaules.
ENGLISH   The young woman already had her mother\'s portly appearance; her flesh seemed to be more puffy and coarse since her marriage.
FRENCH   Alors, comme ses appointements et son tant pour cent ne suffisaient point, elle avait eu l\'idée de chercher un petit travail, en dehors de son emploi.
ENGLISH   We should get on so well together! People always find something to talk about when they come from the same part.\"  He was choking, and she was at last able to say kindly: \"You\'re not reasonable; you promised me never to speak of that again.
FRENCH    Toutes trois s\'étaient levées.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! je vous aime, je vous aime...
FRENCH   Je vais en être pour une bouteille de champagne, moi.
FRENCH   Après ceux- là, d\'autres, et toujours d\'autres! Tous les commerces du quartier y passeront.
ENGLISH   Then the footsteps drew nearer; and, on stretching out her neck, she recognised inspector Jouve, who had just entered the corridor, with his stiff military walk.
FRENCH    Denise vit Bourras préoccupé pendant une quinzaine de jours.
FRENCH   Mouret avait eu cette idée.
ENGLISH   I know him; he wished to intimate that the daughters of our great families are only fit to marry his shop messengers.\"  She was getting quite animated.
FRENCH    Ces dames continuèrent la discussion sur les vêtements des grands magasins.
ENGLISH   He had conquered even the mothers, he reigned over all with the brutality of a despot, whose caprices ruined many a household.
ENGLISH    Then the idea occurred to her that there was another door upstairs leading to the bedrooms; but to reach it she would have to go right across the shop.
ENGLISH   Yes, I was obstinate; I hoped to bring back our former prosperity; I wanted to hand you the books, saying: \'Look here! the year I commenced we sold so much cloth, and this year, the year I retire, we have sold ten thousand or twenty thousand francs\' worth more.\' In short, you understand, it was a vow I made to myself, the very natural desire I had to prove that the house had not declined in my hands.
ENGLISH   Figures were bandied about, garments rained thick and fast on the tables.
FRENCH    -- Laissez-moi, murmura la jeune fille en reculant.
ENGLISH    \"You will allow me?\" said she.
FRENCH    -- C\'est vous, mademoiselle.
ENGLISH   I am ready to apologize to you, if he desires it.\"  Mouret was listening, excited by this quarrel but unable to find a word to put a stop to it.
ENGLISH   Mouret had to give his opinion; he came up to them and affected to be very impartial.
FRENCH   Est-ce qu\'une d\'elles, le cerveau et le coeur vides, ne lui apprendrait pas la bêtise et l\'inutilité de l\'existence? Justement, ce jour là, Octave semblait perdre de son bel équilibre; lui qui, d\'habitude, soufflait la fièvre à ses clientes, avec la grâce tranquille d\'un opérateur, il était comme pris dans la crise de passion dont peu à peu les magasins brûlaient.
FRENCH   Une fille ramassée dans quelque ruisseau.
ENGLISH   Thus, one morning, as Mouret was going through the silk department, he stopped short quite surprised to see Favier altering the price tickets of a stock of black velvet.
FRENCH    Alors, devant ce défilé triomphal qu\'ils devaient subir deux fois chaque jour, le coeur des Baudu se fendit.
FRENCH    -- Ça se casse tout de suite, ces petites machines.
ENGLISH   Afterwards, in the afternoon, when Denise went to fetch Pépé from Madame Gras\', the latter declared that he was getting too big for her to keep any longer; and this was another annoyance, for it would be necessary to find him a school, perhaps send him away.
FRENCH    Il l\'accompagna jusqu\'à la porte, qu\'il referma ensuite.
FRENCH   Il semblait que le dieu du chiffon eût là son tabernacle blanc.
FRENCH   Sous cet écrasement, l\'oncle, sans pouvoir s\'arrêter, marchait toujours autour de la table, de son pas du convoi, aveugle et muet; tandis que la tante ne disait rien non plus, tombée sur une chaise, avec la face blanche d\'une blessée, dont le sang s\'épuisait goutte à goutte.
ENGLISH    The manager of the silk department, introduced to her by Mouret himself, now occasionally called on her at her five o\'clock tea.
ENGLISH   Clara on her side was looking after the heaps, arranging them in such a manner that they should occupy the least possible space on the tables.
FRENCH   Il y avait alors, sur la place de Paris, un courtier, en rapport avec tous les grands tailleurs, qui sauvait les petites maisons de draps et de flanelles, lorsqu\'il voulait bien les représenter.
ENGLISH   His previous violence fell to this feverish resignation.
FRENCH   On ne causait, aux confections, comme dans les autres comptoirs, que du départ de Denise; et la première en était toute malade, car elle comptait sur la protection de son ancienne vendeuse.
FRENCH   C\'était un rêve ancien, nourri sournoisement tandis qu\'il se débattait dans les soies, tremblant de ne pas trouver à vendre son fonds avant la débâcle, se jurant de mettre son pauvre argent dans un commerce où l\'on pût voler à l\'aise.
FRENCH   Elle descendit, très inquiète.
FRENCH   Déjà Bourdoncle regardait Mme Aurélie d\'un air mécontent, surpris qu\'elle n\'eût pas le tact de prendre sa retraite: trop vieille pour la vente! ce glas allait sonner bientôt, emportant la dynastie des Lhomme.
FRENCH    Elle n\'avait pas prononcé une parole; seulement, une flamme rose était montée à ses joues, tandis que ses yeux se mouillaient de nouvelles larmes, d\'une douceur délicieuse.
ENGLISH   Now that he was second-hand he walked by himself, saluted with respect by the mere salesmen.
ENGLISH   And beneath the gaze of all the men and women who were studying her, estimating her like farmers would a horse at a fair, Denise lost what little countenance had still remained to her.
ENGLISH    She paid a month in advance, asked for the linen--a pair of sheets and two towels, and made her bed without delay, happy and relieved to know where she would sleep that night.
FRENCH   Et, toute frémissante de pitié, révoltée de tant de souffrances, elle ne put se contenir; elle osa d\'abord parler de Bourras, de ce pauvre homme à terre qu\'on allait égorger.
FRENCH   Elle avait ensuite demandé trois paires de gants de Suède.
FRENCH   Jamais Denise n\'avait plus souffert au rayon, et maintenant elle désespérait de le conquérir.
FRENCH   Après celui-là, elle s\'était mise avec un employé des postes.
ENGLISH   Monsieur de Boves and Vallagnosc, still standing before a window, cast shadows upon the carpet: whilst, motionless in the last gleam of light which came in by the other window, Monsieur Marty, who had quietly entered, shewed his poverty-stricken silhouette, his worn-out, well-brushed frock coat, and his pale face wan from constant teaching and the more haggard as what he had heard of the ladies\' conversation had quite upset him.
FRENCH   Ensuite, Bourdoncle lui conta la nouvelle négligence de son fils Albert, qui parut la désespérer: cet enfant la tuerait; au moins, le père, s\'il n\'était pas fort, avait pour lui de la conduite.
FRENCH   Hutin et Favier les attendaient toujours.
ENGLISH   To put the curious ones, who might be watching her, off the scent, she did not go straight to the silk department; pretending that she wanted something among the laces, she went up to Deloche, and asked him a question; and then, on reaching the ground-floor, she passed through the printed cottons department, and was just going into the cravat gallery, when she stopped short, startled and surprised.
ENGLISH   The door closed, and he thought he could hear Vallagnosc\'s laugh, muffled by the hangings.
FRENCH    -- Et puis, il faudrait d\'abord avoir de l\'amitié pour quelqu\'un, reprit-elle, les joues roses.
ENGLISH   Since her marriage had been decided on, she had marched about with more disdainful airs than ever on her putty-looking face.
FRENCH   Tandis qu\'on le croyait occupé à inspecter les étalons de Saint-Lô, elle achevait de le manger, dans une petite maison louée par lui à Versailles.
FRENCH   La femme a raconté, n\'est-ce pas? qu\'elle s\'était fait près de vingt mille francs cette année, et cela lui a permis de me prendre ma pauvre maison.
FRENCH    Il avait gardé sa blouse de travail, et il était nu-tête, avec ses cheveux blonds en désordre, dont les frisures coulaient sur sa peau de fille.
FRENCH   Mouret! Est-ce que M.
ENGLISH   Since the enlargement of The Ladies\' Paradise the refectories had been shifted to the fourth storey of the new buildings.
ENGLISH   And when he saw her thus trembling under his hands, which were grazing her neck, he began to regret his good-natured impulse, for he feared above all to lose his authority.
ENGLISH   He still failed to understand the triumph achieved by The Ladies\' Paradise, but he acknowledged the defeat of the old-fashioned traders.
FRENCH   Jamais il ne levait la tête, elle croyait souffrir de la vanité de ce garçon, le suivait des yeux, sans craindre d\'être surprise.
ENGLISH   She embraced him, and stood looking at him fixedly, and weeping.
ENGLISH   Still she watched him without fear of being discovered; whereas, as soon as she saw Mouret, who also passed every day, she began to tremble, and quickly concealed herself, her bosom heaving.
FRENCH   Il ne semblait plus chez lui, dans ce cadre luisant, sur ces fonds tendres, effaré avec sa grande barbe et ses cheveux.
ENGLISH   A night-light was burning dimly in the hall, and Denise on finding herself in this uncertain glimmer, hesitated, and was seized with fear, for a moment previously, on turning the corner of the street, she had seen the door close on the shadowy figure of a man.
FRENCH   Déjà, dans le wagon, dès que le train avait quitté Valognes, elle s\'était sentie pleine de regret; et voilà pourquoi, à l\'arrivée, elle avait laissé la malle et fait déjeuner les enfants.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s something fearful,\" said he.
ENGLISH   \"For I know my lot in life.
ENGLISH   It was the downfall of the shops of an entire district, all the small traders dragging their ruin, amidst the thud of damp shoes, through the black mud of Paris.
ENGLISH    Denise, however, thought but little of these things.
FRENCH   Au premier étage pourtant, un carreau donnant sur la cour lui permit de voir vaguement, comme au fond d\'une eau dormante, l\'escalier déjeté, les murailles noires de crasse, les portes craquées et dépeintes.
ENGLISH   \"Be quiet, young ladies! We can\'t hear ourselves speak, my word of honour!\"  Then she again went on calling out: \"Seven mantles, old style, Sicilian, first size, at a hundred and thirty! Three pelisses, surah, second size, at a hundred and fifty! Have you got that down, Mademoiselle Baudu?\"  \"Yes, madame.\"  Clara then had to look after the armfuls of garments piled upon the tables.
ENGLISH   Whilst her whole being was still trembling and bleeding, she managed to conceal her torment beneath a mask of smiling, well-bred elegance.
ENGLISH    \"Have you got everything there, Bouthemont?\" asked Mouret, approaching a broad-shouldered young fellow who was checking the contents of a case.
FRENCH    -- Sans doute, mais je ne sais pas laquelle.
FRENCH    -- Oh! j\'en souffre toujours...
FRENCH    -- Enfin, je vais attendre, reprit Mme Desforges.
ENGLISH       CHAPTER XIII.
FRENCH   Maintenant, Deloche et lui ne se quittaient plus.
ENGLISH    \"Oh, mamma!\" murmured Valentine, \"just look at these cravats.
FRENCH   Quant à la surprise de Colomban, elle n\'était pas feinte: il ne s\'était réellement jamais aperçu de la lente agonie de Geneviève.
ENGLISH   A journeyman-baker occupied the first room, and it was the other, the further one, that was vacant.
FRENCH   Il lui fallait une seule vendeuse, et il y avait déjà dix demandes inscrites.
ENGLISH   The sun had just set behind the trees in the gardens, the daylight was departing, delicate shadows were gradually invading the spacious apartment.
ENGLISH    \"And Pépé?\" he asked.
ENGLISH   What a way they have of looking at you and talking to you in there--eh? I\'m applying for a place in the lace department.
ENGLISH   Henriette was seeking to compel him to say something in condemnation of the girl; and, as he still remained mute and undecided, she stung him with a final insult:  \"Very good, sir.
FRENCH    -- Monsieur Bourras, répéta Denise, en tâchant de l\'emmener à l\'écart, vous savez qu\'on ne vous abandonnera pas.
ENGLISH   Mouret practised the system of offering articles to the customers, hooking and plundering them as they passed; for he made use of every sort of advertisement, laughing at the discretion of certain fellow-tradesmen who thought their goods should be left to speak for themselves.
ENGLISH   There was never any stand-still, the article of the season was always on hand; and from counter to counter the customer found herself caught and subjugated, at one buying the material for a gown; at another cotton and trimming, elsewhere a mantle, in fact everything necessary to complete her costume; while in addition there were all the unforeseen purchases, chases, a surrender to a longing for the useless and the pretty.
ENGLISH   \"I know some women who would never buy a ribbon except at the Louvre.
FRENCH   Elle regardait Denise depuis un instant, elle se rappelait ce qu\'elle avait souffert elle-même, les premiers mois, dans son rayon.
ENGLISH   So you see girls forcibly drift into it.\"  She then spoke of her first admirer, a lawyer\'s clerk whom she had met at a party at Meudon.
FRENCH   Et l\'on n\'osait s\'interroger sur les disparus, Quinette, Mlle Tatin, d\'autres qui, du matin au soir, sombraient, roulés, emportés dans le flot des désastres; sans compter Robineau allongé sur son lit, avec sa jambe cassée.
ENGLISH    \"Now, let\'s see,\" said Henriette, \"perhaps we shall get on better.\"  On entering, Mouret had found Denise standing upright, in the middle of the bright light.
FRENCH   Il paraît que l\'hôtel appartenait au Crédit Immobilier, dont le président, le baron Hartmann, vient de le céder à notre fameux Mouret...
ENGLISH   His first idea had been to dismiss Hutin and Deloche; but he had reflected that if he did not keep them, he would never discover anything; and the others suffered for them: the whole staff trembled.
FRENCH   Des larmes lui montèrent aux yeux.
FRENCH   La pièce était pleine, une queue de monde la traversait dans un bout, entrant et sortant par la porte des dentelles et celle de la lingerie, qui se faisaient face; tandis que, au fond, des clientes en taille essayaient des vêtements, les reins cambrés devant les glaces.
ENGLISH   Although always famished he invariably fell on the worst piece at table, by a sort of cruel fatality.
ENGLISH   Near each pay-desk messengers in uniform stood delivering the bouquets under the supervision of an inspector.
FRENCH   Mouret se marie?  -- C\'est la première nouvelle, répondit Henriette qui jouait l\'indifférence.
ENGLISH   Both conversed for a moment in a low tone, and then the banker exclaimed: \"Well, I\'ll look into the affair.
FRENCH   Et alors on s\'est cogné pour elle...
ENGLISH    Mouret had glanced towards the larger drawing-room, and in a few phrases, whispered in the baron\'s ear, as if he were confiding to him one of those amorous secrets which men sometimes venture to reveal among themselves, he finished explaining the mechanism of modern commerce.
FRENCH    Cependant, la conversation continuait, Hutin les aurait giflées, immobile, attendant leur bon plaisir.
ENGLISH   A fresh affair was in question.
FRENCH   Et rien à elle, pas un sou, pas de quoi acheter les menus objets dont une femme a besoin; elle avait dû attendre quinze jours pour renouveler sa provision de fil et d\'aiguilles.
FRENCH    Cependant, Deloche était resté en arrière, pour échapper aux mots d\'esprit qui continuaient.
ENGLISH    \"Do you hear them?\" he asked.
ENGLISH   No, only scoundrels play such tricks as that! No doubt, I desire nothing but your happiness, but nobody shall ever make me go against my conscience.\"  And he went on for a long time in this way, meandering through a maze of contradictory sentences, like a man who would have liked to be understood at the first word but finds himself obliged to explain everything.
ENGLISH    This remark brought them back to the stock-taking.
FRENCH   Mais, dès qu\'il put s\'approcher de sa soeur, il lui souffla très bas:  -- C\'est une petite blanchisseuse qui reportait son linge...
FRENCH    Sur le trottoir, Baudu n\'adressa pas la parole à sa nièce.
ENGLISH   And finally came the women who were _enceintes_ and whose thefts were invariably thefts of some especially coveted article.
FRENCH   Un franc quatre vingt-dix.
FRENCH   On ne peut les garder pourtant à rester ainsi, les mains ballantes.
ENGLISH   In fact, as she passed through the departments the salesmen appeared full of emotion and bent their heads before her, uncertain as they were what she might be the next day.
ENGLISH   This was the first time he had seen her so completely conquered; and, too high-minded to suffer from it, he experienced nothing but compassion at seeing her in the hands of this handsome fellow, seemingly so tender and yet so cold-hearted.
ENGLISH   The matter was settled in whispers, whilst Madame Guibal interested herself in the displays.
FRENCH   Oui, des portières, dont je ne suis pas satisfaite.
ENGLISH   These voices at times rang out in a shriller key above the tinkling of the small spoons in the china cups; and from time to time, during a brief silence you heard a saucer being harshly laid down on the marble table.
FRENCH   Du reste, il était repris par ses inquiétudes anciennes, devant des combinaisons de réclame qui lui échappaient.
FRENCH   Je vous avertis qu\'on portera beaucoup de drap cette année.
ENGLISH    \"Mademoiselle Vadon!\" said Hutin, in an angry voice, when he at last arrived in the department.
ENGLISH   This girl is a stupid thing without an idea in her head.
FRENCH   J\'ai sa promesse.
ENGLISH   And just as tall Clara was about to fetch it, Mouret arrived, still followed by Bourdoncle.
FRENCH   C\'était lui, qui en mourrait, si on le bouleversait ainsi continuellement! Était-ce sa faute? Il aimait sa fille, il parlait de donner son sang pour elle; mais il ne pouvait cependant pas faire que la maison marchât quand elle ne voulait plus marcher.
FRENCH   Mais, non, non, je ne puis pas, parole d\'honneur! Si je vous cédais, vous me le reprocheriez plus tard.
ENGLISH   However she could not muster the courage to do so, but in her turn bowed, and simply said: \"Thank you, sir.\"  On the way back, Baudu said nothing to his niece, but as if carried away by his reflections walked on very fast, forcing her to run in order to keep up with him.
ENGLISH   He\'s an old humbug, as spiteful as a cat, and thinks he\'s still got his troopers to talk to.\"  This was quite true; Jouve was detested by all the salespeople for his severity.
ENGLISH   He, smiling, concealed his constraint beneath an air of amiable protection.
ENGLISH    \"Ah!\" said she, \"you are buying a travelling cloak.\"  \"Oh! dear, no,\" replied Madame Desforges; \"they are frightful.\"  However Madame Marty had just noticed a striped cloak which she rather liked.
ENGLISH   It was an old, cherished idea of his, slyly nurtured while he was struggling with his silk business, trembling with fear lest he should not sell it before the crash came, and vowing that he would afterwards put his money into some undertaking where he could rob folks at his ease.
ENGLISH   So much the worse for the old fool! And he spoke of his repeated proposals; he had offered him as much as a hundred thousand francs.
ENGLISH    \"Good afternoon! I was just thinking of you.\"  \"I\'ve been looking for you myself.
ENGLISH   Each young man put away his hat and over-coat as he arrived, stifling a yawn, still half asleep as he did so.
FRENCH   On blâmait à voix basse le patron d\'aller trop vite; on l\'accusait d\'avoir agrandi dangereusement les magasins, avant de pouvoir compter sur une augmentation suffisante de la clientèle; on tremblait surtout en le voyant mettre tout l\'argent de la caisse sur un coup de cartes, emplir les comptoirs d\'un entassement de marchandises, sans garder un sou de réserve.
FRENCH   Presque au même moment, M.
FRENCH    Henriette le regardait à son tour.
ENGLISH   He knew Madame Aurélie, or, at least, her husband, Lhomme, the cashier, a stout man, who had had his right arm crushed by an omnibus.
ENGLISH    \"Nineteen sous--is it possible?\" said Madame Marty, tempted like her daughter.
FRENCH   Rien d\'anormal ne les frappa, ils passèrent lentement au milieu des commis respectueux.
ENGLISH   But, behind her back, when he had emptied her purse and shattered her nerves, he remained full of the secret scorn of a man to whom a woman has been foolish enough to yield.
ENGLISH   Another invention for cramming their pockets! There was a secret rivalry between these two.
FRENCH   Comme le soleil, l\'après-midi, chauffait la façade de la place Gaillon, on étouffait dans les salons de l\'entresol, malgré les stores.
ENGLISH   In a corner of the department inspector Jouve who had not lost sight of Madame de Boves, notwithstanding the latter\'s apparent dawdling, stood amidst the crowd, with an indifferent air, but still keeping a sharp eye on her.
FRENCH   Vous vous payez donc des femmes chic?  -- Mais non, mon cher.
ENGLISH   All was over, she would be better alone, out of the way, dead! And thereupon, without informing either Pauline or Deloche, she at once went for her money.
FRENCH   Puis, lorsqu\'elle se révéla plus tard comme une vendeuse remarquable, au courant désormais du mécanisme de la maison, il y eut une stupeur indignée; et, à partir de ce moment, ces demoiselles s\'entendirent de manière à ne jamais lui laisser une cliente sérieuse.
ENGLISH    As the three ladies went off together, and Madame Marty referred remorsefully to the work-table for which she had no earthly need, Madame Guibal said in her calm voice: \"Well! you can return it.
FRENCH   C\'était une clarté blanche, d\'une aveuglante fixité, épandue comme une réverbération d\'astre décoloré, et qui tuait le crépuscule.
ENGLISH   For instance, Bédoré and his sister, who keep the hosiery shop in the Rue Gaillon, have already lost half their customers; Mademoiselle Tatin, who sells under-linen in the Passage Choiseul, has been obliged to lower her prices, to be able to sell at all.
FRENCH   Une première fois, il avait vaincu, par un renvoi brutal.
FRENCH    Tous deux parlaient du baron Hartmann, directeur du Crédit Immobilier.
ENGLISH   Between every two articles that were called out, they talked of nothing but money.
ENGLISH    \"Wait a bit, I want my niece thoroughly to understand my motto.
ENGLISH    \"Yes,\" curtly replied the latter, who had made up her mind to be impolite.
ENGLISH   In the first place, she began to get anxious at seeing Jean so pale; and when she understood that it was on account of another sweetheart she tried to quiet him by opening her purse; but he shook his head and refused, saying it was a serious matter this time, the niece of a very rich pastry-cook, who would not accept even a bunch of violets.
FRENCH   Mais pourtant un garçon prenait, dans un des compartiments, les quelques paquets destinés au quartier de la Madeleine; et, sur la grande table de triage, Campion, le chef de service, était assis, les jambes ballantes, les yeux ouverts.
ENGLISH   Let them gossip; they\'re jealous, of course!\"  \"My dear,\" said Denise at last, with her sensible air, \"I don\'t blame you in any way! You\'ve spoken nothing but the truth.
ENGLISH    \"Hullo! is that you?\" said Mouret, all at once recognising Paul de Vallagnosc whom a messenger was conducting to him.
FRENCH    -- Alors, vous êtes pour ceux qui vous ont flanquée à la rue? demanda Gaujean.
FRENCH    -- C\'est un guet-apens! cria-t-elle, lorsque Bourdoncle et Jouve rentrèrent.
FRENCH    -- Donne, monsieur.
FRENCH   C\'était là, aux deux bouts, que se trouvaient, en piles colossales, les deux soies dont la maison avait la propriété exclusive, le Paris-Bonheur et le Cuir-d\'or, des articles exceptionnels, qui allaient révolutionner le commerce des nouveautés.
ENGLISH   At sight of such a power of fascination, so well controlled, strong enough to play with woman without being overcome by the intoxication which she diffuses, Baron Hartmann, who had not ceased to look at Mouret, felt his admiration increasing.
ENGLISH   Why not have the Central Markets at once? And, in spite of his wife\'s supplicating looks, notwithstanding his own effort, he went on from the works to the amount of business done in the big shop.
ENGLISH   Who is she?\"  \"Oh! nobody,\" replied Madame Desforges, in her ill-natured voice.
FRENCH    -- Servez à quelque chose, au moins...
ENGLISH   When she had spent all the day on her feet, she had to go straight home, and look after Pépé, whom old Bourras fortunately insisted on feeding; but there was still a lot to do; a shirt to wash, a blouse to mend; without mentioning the noise made by the youngster, which made her head ache fit to split.
ENGLISH   Paris irritated her, she hated The Ladies\' Paradise, she no longer knew why she had consented to go back.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, elle doit être ici, nous allons la voir.
ENGLISH   She said no, always no.
ENGLISH   He had not reckoned on five hundred and thirty-four letters arriving on a Tuesday.
FRENCH   Peu à peu, il s\'enhardissait, demandait des conseils, dans l\'idée que Denise pouvait lui être utile auprès de son ancienne camarade.
ENGLISH   The girls wrote their names on a slate in the order of their arrival, and whenever one of them had served a customer, she re-inscribed her name beneath the others.
FRENCH   Il venait de lancer son invention, le parapluie à godet, qui plus tard devait se populariser.
ENGLISH   And thereupon he imagined that she was about to join a sweetheart, a future husband perhaps.
FRENCH    -- Bah! reprit Baudu pour se donner du courage, nous n\'en mourrons pas.
ENGLISH   Did I not prefer you at that lady\'s house? have I not quarrelled with her in order to belong solely to you? And I am still waiting for a word of thanks, a little gratitude.
FRENCH   Ses yeux brillèrent de gratitude, elle le suivit d\'un long regard, pendant qu\'il jouait des coudes, afin de regagner son rayon au plus vite.
ENGLISH   And she simply replied: \"We\'ll see, uncle.\"  Then she spoke of going to bed early with the children, for they were all three very tired.
FRENCH    -- On n\'a pas idée...
FRENCH   Au temps où leur commerce marchait, ils avaient dû élever cinq garçons, dont trois étaient morts à vingt ans; le quatrième avait mal tourné, le cinquième venait de partir pour le Mexique, comme capitaine.
FRENCH   Henriette se taisait, semblait rêveuse, partagée entre le désir d\'oublier davantage Denise dans l\'antichambre, et la peur que Mouret, prévenu maintenant, ne s\'en allât.
FRENCH    -- Que fais-tu là? reprit-elle.
FRENCH   Mais les Lhomme surtout s\'inquiétaient, s\'attendaient chaque matin au renvoi de leur fils Albert: on était très mécontent de la façon dont il tenait sa caisse, des femmes venaient le distraire; et deux fois Mme Aurélie dut fléchir la direction.
FRENCH    Déjà Mouret avait honte de sa minute d\'abandon.
ENGLISH   His last profits were swallowed up by this place--the only folly he had been guilty of in his honest, upright career as a tradesman stubbornly attached to the old ways.
ENGLISH    Geneviève gave him a long look, and then in her turn remarked: \"When people understand each other, the rest comes naturally.\"  Their affection had sprung up in this gloomy nook of old Paris like a flower in a cellar.
ENGLISH   \"They are at table.\"  But she motioned him to be silent, and drew him into a corner.
FRENCH   Madame m\'a recommandé de la prévenir...
FRENCH   Bouthemont avait repris ses plaintes: les vendeurs menaçaient de partir, et il s\'en trouvait d\'excellents parmi eux.
ENGLISH   At eight o\'clock, he took his stand at the door, watch in hand; and at three minutes past the hour, the breathless young people who arrived were greeted with his implacable \"Go and get paid!\" This was a quick and cleanly manner of doing the work.
FRENCH   Elle n\'avait pas compris d\'abord.
FRENCH   Il avait raison, elle s\'accusait de ses ignorances d\'autrefois, quand elle songeait à lui.
FRENCH   Passez donc le pain!  Le gros pain faisait le tour, et lorsqu\'il se fut coupé une tranche le dernier, il replanta le couteau dans la croûte.
ENGLISH   Her quick ear had just detected the sound of Bourdoncle\'s and Jouve\'s steps at the end of the corridor.
FRENCH   Demain, venez me parlez.
ENGLISH   A red leather bag, which she had not been willing to leave in the anteroom, hung from her right hand.
FRENCH   Ça ne me va pas, voilà tout.
FRENCH   Pourtant, il lui fallut obéir, elle dut laisser Marguerite draper le manteau sur elle, comme sur un mannequin.
FRENCH   ah! mon Dieu!...
ENGLISH   It was the marriage without further delay.
FRENCH   Il faut que les métiers travaillent, je vous l\'ai dit.
FRENCH   Et ces choses lui paraissaient, comme la boutique, s\'être assombries encore et avoir des larmes.
FRENCH   Enfin, devant la police, il était parti.
ENGLISH   When they approached, she took refuge in the lace department, but suddenly heard herself called by name and thereupon ran off to the door conducting to the private stairs.
ENGLISH   One morning she had yet another interview with him, at the news that Bourras had been turned into the street, and that Baudu was going to shut up shop.
ENGLISH   With a slow step he wended his way amidst all these riches thrown about in disorder, heaped up in their rough state.
FRENCH    Jusqu\'au soir, derrière sa bonne grâce de métier, elle se tortura ainsi pour savoir où trouver de l\'argent.
ENGLISH    \"So there\'s no one here to serve?\" asked Hutin.
FRENCH   Quand cette dame est là, vous n\'en finissez plus...
ENGLISH   No doubt she would be sent away, and the children would be without food.
FRENCH   J\'ai encore dix ans de bail, ils n\'auront pas la maison avant dix ans, lorsque je devrais crever de faim entre les quatre murs vides...
FRENCH   C\'était, à travers les glaces pâlies d\'une buée, un pullulement vague de clartés, tout un intérieur confus d\'usine.
FRENCH   J\'ai là une voiture à l\'heure.
FRENCH   Je ne veux même plus rien voir.
ENGLISH   Denise\'s image rose with him.
FRENCH    -- Je savais bien...
ENGLISH    \"Just listen to me,\" resumed the draper.
ENGLISH   At Nogent, a wedding-party got out, amidst a storm of laughter.
ENGLISH    \"You know he\'s written to my landlord, offering to buy the house?\" said Bourras, looking steadily at the draper with his fiery eyes.
FRENCH   Si vous me croyez honnête, je reste...
ENGLISH   Others however came up in twos and threes, talking fast, and monopolising the whole of the pavement; and all, with a similar gesture, flung away their cigarettes or cigars before crossing the threshold.
FRENCH   De cette façon, c\'était Mouret, ce n\'était pas lui qui perdait sur l\'étoffe.
FRENCH    Cela le fit rire.
FRENCH   Et le salon oriental?  -- Ravissant!  -- Mon Dieu! quel succès!...
ENGLISH   They spoke for a moment of going for a row, but abandoned the idea as Baugé was not a good waterman.
FRENCH   Ce serait le comble, de les voir se mettre entre ma famille et moi!...
FRENCH    -- C\'est fait, mon cher...
ENGLISH    \"Why not?\" asked Robineau, surprised.
FRENCH   Elle venait d\'obtenir par faveur ce poste de servante, elle avait une grande blouse noire, marquée à l\'épaule d\'un chiffre en laine jaune.
FRENCH   Cette fois, elle trouvait là comme une protection.
FRENCH   De là, il dominait le magasin, ayant autour de lui les rayons de l\'entresol, plongeant sur les rayons du rez-de-chaussée.
ENGLISH   The counter was covered, and she plunged her hands into an increasing mountain of lace, Malines, Valenciennes, and Chantilly, her fingers trembling with desire, her face gradually warming with a sensual delight; whilst Blanche, close to her, agitated by the same passion, was very pale, her flesh inflated and flabby.
ENGLISH   Paul, who belonged to an old parliamentary family, noble, poor, and proud, had proved a good scholar, always at the top of his class and continually held up as an example by the master, who prophesied a brilliant future for him; whereas Octave had remained at the bottom, amongst the dunces, but nevertheless fat and jolly, indulging in all sorts of pleasures outside.
FRENCH   Aucun magasin n\'avait encore remué la ville d\'un tel fracas de publicité.
FRENCH   De vrais hommes, à présent!  Malgré son orgueil, elle se serait mise à genoux pour faire sa cour.
ENGLISH   Jouve, listening for the sound of any footsteps, cast a rapid glance around him; and then, very excited, losing all control over himself, he attempted to kiss her on the neck.
FRENCH   Elle devait boire, sa maigreur avait des teintes plombées, et ses mains seules, blanches et fines, disaient encore la distinction de sa race.
FRENCH   Puis, il repartait.
ENGLISH   But the tempest attained its greatest violence in the glove department, where it fell upon one of the few Parisians in the house, handsome Mignot, as he was called, the illegitimate son of a music-mistress.
FRENCH   Les petits étaient chargés de paquets: Madeleine avait sous le bras une robe pour elle, Edmond portait une collection de petits souliers, tandis que le plus jeune, Lucien, était coiffé d\'un képi neuf.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle sent the saleswomen away and resumed, with his quiet air: \"We are quite willing, madame, to hush up this painful affair for the sake of your family.
ENGLISH   However, he hesitated, for the employees were cautioned against heaping up these precious fabrics, and he had allowed himself to be robbed of ten yards of Malines only the week before.
ENGLISH   And the same poor jokes passed from mouth to mouth.
FRENCH    Alors, il s\'égaya davantage, il laissa percer le fond de sa brutalité, sous son air d\'adoration sensuelle.
ENGLISH   She again had to wait for the ladies in the furnishing materials department, where a delightful cretonne had caught Madame Marty\'s eye.
FRENCH    Elle causa, dit que c\'était bien commode, ce mécanisme des rendus; auparavant, elle n\'achetait jamais, tandis que, maintenant, elle se laissait tenter parfois.
ENGLISH   She shook her head, looked round and espied the collar and cuffs in the basin.
ENGLISH   So much the worse! They sent me upstairs to the work-room to fetch a bodkin.\"  And thereupon they separated.
ENGLISH    \"Yes, sir.
FRENCH   On se leva, la débandade de la sortie emplit longuement les corridors.
FRENCH   Ah! si je n\'étais pas si vieux, si fatigué!  Un long silence régna.
FRENCH   Tous, d\'ailleurs, dans le rayon, depuis le débutant rêvant de passer vendeur, jusqu\'au premier convoitant la situation d\'intéressé, tous n\'avaient qu\'une idée fixe, déloger le camarade au-dessus de soi pour monter d\'un échelon, le manger s\'il devenait un obstacle; et cette lutte des appétits, cette poussée des uns sur les autres, était comme le bon fonctionnement même de la machine, ce qui enrageait la vente et allumait cette flambée du succès dont Paris s\'étonnait.
ENGLISH    The next day at lunch time, as Robineau had sent her on an errand, and she was passing The Old Elbeuf, she opened the door on seeing Colomban alone in the shop.
FRENCH   C\'est quelque chose qu\'elle veut te dire.
ENGLISH   Then Mouret, alone and pensive, crossed the shop once more.
FRENCH   Je ne dis rien, parce que j\'entends papa pleurer, et que je ne veux pas rendre maman plus malade.
ENGLISH    All his days were now spent amidst the same grievous obsession.
ENGLISH   Still after a deal of trouble she managed to put her boots on, having resolved that she would show herself in the department.
FRENCH   C\'était très curieux, on ne s\'imaginait pas le nombre de voleuses qu\'on arrêtait aux dentelles.
FRENCH   Comment refuser? Jamais il n\'aurait la force.
FRENCH    Et, se tournant vers Mme Marty:  -- Une marquise, ma chère, une pauvre fille tombée dans la gêne.
FRENCH   Qu\'est-ce que ça va être, à l\'intérieur!  Ces dames, saisies par le courant, ne pouvaient plus reculer.
FRENCH   Elle ne pouvait descendre acheter une bougie, sur ces trottoirs boueux où rôdait la débauche des vieux quartiers, sans entendre derrière elle un souffle ardent, des paroles crues de convoitise; et les hommes la poursuivaient jusqu\'au fond de l\'allée noire, encouragé par l\'aspect sordide de la maison.
FRENCH   Pépé jouait à ses pieds, Jean avait repris son poste d\'observation, sur le seuil: Et, pendant près d\'une heure, elle s\'intéressa aux choses qui se passaient autour d\'elle.
FRENCH    -- Tirez donc la ceinture par-devant, répétait Mme Aurélie.
ENGLISH   But the messenger on duty told him that Monsieur Mouret was with Monsieur Bourdoncle and Monsieur Robineau; they had been talking together for the last quarter of an hour.
FRENCH   Le bourdonnement des voix faisait un bruit énorme de fleuve qui charrie.
FRENCH   Peut-être l\'oncle Baudu l\'envoyait-il, regrettant sa rigueur; car il continuait à ne pas même saluer sa nièce, bien qu\'il ne pût ignorer la misère où elle se trouvait.
FRENCH   Des fureurs lui battaient le crâne d\'un flot de sang: il voyait rouge, il rêvait de prendre Denise d\'une étreinte, de la garder, en étouffant ses cris.
ENGLISH    \"Well,\" she resumed, in a tone which she endeavoured to render agreeable, \"I cannot return your compliment; you don\'t look at all well this evening.\"  \"Overwork!\" remarked Vallagnosc.
ENGLISH   It was a secret warfare, into which the young ladies themselves entered with equal fierceness; and in their mutual weariness, always on foot and worked to death, all difference of sex disappeared and nothing remained but their contending interests, irritated by the fever of business.
ENGLISH   That boy would kill her; his father, although not a man of talent, was at least well-conducted, careful, and honest.
ENGLISH    This was Denise\'s great trouble; she dared not take him back to Madame Gras, and could not leave him alone in the bedroom, shut up from morning to night.
ENGLISH   \"Don\'t cry like that; it annoys my lodgers.\" And as she thanked him with a fresh outburst of tears, he resumed: \"Do keep quiet! Come and see me to-morrow.
FRENCH   Qu\'avait-elle donc pour le lier ainsi? ne l\'avait-il pas vue sans chaussures? n\'était-elle pas entrée presque par charité? Au moins, s\'il se fût agi d\'une de ces créatures superbes qui ameutent la foule! mais cette petite fille, cette rien du tout! Elle avait, en somme, une de ces figures moutonnières dont on ne dit rien.
FRENCH   Vous le savez depuis longtemps, ne jouez pas le jeu cruel de faire l\'ignorante avec moi...
FRENCH    À ce moment, la vaste pièce s\'emplissait de voix.
FRENCH   Mais comment voulez-vous qu\'on se retrouve, au milieu de ce monde?  -- C\'est magnifique, n\'est-ce pas?  -- Éblouissant, ma chère.
FRENCH   Mme Guibal, Henriette, Blanche, mesuraient, coupaient, gâchaient.
FRENCH    Elle se sentait à bout de forces.
ENGLISH   Waiting alone in her large Louis XVI.
FRENCH   Quand il venait serrer la main de son ancien condisciple, il s\'en allait presque vexé de le voir si vibrant de vie, au milieu de son peuple de coquettes.
ENGLISH   She was still a probationer, without a salary; the other girls in her department frequently prevented her from selling, and she only just managed to pay Pépé\'s board and lodging, thanks to the unimportant customers they were good enough to leave her.
FRENCH   Robineau était condamné, chacun déjà emportait son os.
ENGLISH   A doubt remained beneath the charm which was gradually operating on him; and he was going to reply in an evasive manner, when a pressing call from the ladies spared him the trouble.
FRENCH    -- Moi, à votre place, j\'achèterais le manteau tout fait, dit Mme Desforges en revenant au Paris-Bonheur, ça vous coûtera moins cher.
FRENCH   Quatre idem, première grandeur, à deux cent vingt!  Le travail recommença.
ENGLISH   Where would you find the customers to fill such a cathedral?\"  Mouret looked at him for a moment in silence, as if stupefied by the refusal which these words implied.
FRENCH   Dans l\'air immobile, où l\'étouffement du calorifère, attiédissait l\'odeur des étoffes, le brouhaha augmentait, fait de tous les bruits, du piétinement continu, des mêmes phrases cent fois répétées autour des comptoirs, de l\'or sonnant sur le cuivre des caisses assiégées par une bousculade de porte-monnaie, des paniers roulants dont les charges de paquets tombaient sans relâche dans les caves béantes.
ENGLISH   He raised a temple to her, caused her to be steeped in incense by a legion of shopmen, prepared the ritual of a new cultus, thinking of nothing but woman and ever seeking to imagine more powerful fascinations.
FRENCH   Encore une de ces demoiselles qui se trouvait en retard! Et elle reconnut Pauline, en entendant celle- ci ouvrir la porte d\'à côté.
ENGLISH    \"I can\'t give you ten francs,\" she resumed.
ENGLISH   The streets succeeded one another, after the Rue des Moulins came the Rue Sainte-Anne.
FRENCH    -- Comment, quelqu\'un? murmura Denise, sans comprendre d\'abord.
ENGLISH    \"You ought to get hold of her,\" said Favier, in his sly, artful way.
FRENCH   Ces messieurs estiment qu\'il y aurait danger à élargir encore vos affaires.
ENGLISH   \"I tremble when I take a dozen, and at ninety days too.
ENGLISH    \"Come,\" he made bold to say at last, \"what can that matter to you since I assure you that there is nothing whatever between them?\"  \"Just so!\" she cried, \"it\'s because he loves her! I don\'t care a fig for the others, the chance acquaintances, the friends of a day!\"  She spoke of Clara with disdain.
FRENCH   Puis, quand elle y était enfin entrée, pour échapper aux commis du blanc qui riaient, elle avait comme buté tout d\'un coup contre l\'étalage de Mouret; et, malgré son effarement, la femme se réveillant en elle, les joues subitement rouges, elle s\'oubliait à regarder flamber l\'incendie des soies.
FRENCH   En redescendant, secouée encore, elle avait rencontré Deloche aux dentelles; et, sans remarquer que Liénard parlait au jeune homme, elle s\'était soulagée.
FRENCH   Et une clameur montait entre les maisons blanches, ce fleuve humain roulait sous l\'âme de Paris épandue, un souffle énorme et doux, dont on sentait la caresse géante.
FRENCH   Enfin, à l\'autre bout du sous-sol, il arriva au service du départ.
FRENCH   Il était plus sec, plus desséché par ses dures besognes, dans sa mince redingote, luisante.
FRENCH    -- Et tu as payé le morceau vingt-cinq francs? reprit-elle en examinant chaque maille de la dentelle.
ENGLISH   The whole department was now aiding and abetting the intrigue, the young ladies grew more agitated than ever, Lhomme and Joseph affected not to see or hear anything.
FRENCH   Denise déclara qu\'elle avait de quoi payer le premier mois.
FRENCH   Il faut que j\'aille à la parfumerie.
FRENCH   Toute une fatigue d\'esprit lui en restait, un désir mêlé de lassitude; et il lui semblait être déjà rassasiée de ces amusements, dont elle n\'avait jamais goûté.
FRENCH   Mon Dieu! quel homme sévère! ne pouvait-on pardonner une fois? On ferait venir la coupable, on la gronderait.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, à titre de seconde, Denise avait une des plus grandes chambres, dont les deux fenêtres mansardées ouvraient sur la rue.
ENGLISH   \"Ah, I know what it is! When I first came up from Chartres, and old Cugnot didn\'t send me a sou, I many a time washed my own chemises! Yes, yes, my chemises! I had only two, and there was always one in soak.\"  She sat down, still out of breath from running.
ENGLISH      THE END..
FRENCH   Cette fièvre, depuis le matin, avait grandi peu à peu, comme la griserie même qui se dégageait des étoffes remuées.
FRENCH    -- Vous êtes toujours résolue à nous quitter? demanda Mouret, dont la voix tremblait.
ENGLISH   But his eyes became dim, this colossal business no longer had any importance for him; he had but one idea, that of going away to some distant land, and abandoning everything, should she persist in saying no.
FRENCH   Brusquement, il s\'aperçut qu\'il barrait la porte.
FRENCH   On lui avait bien dit que Mouret, après les refus de Denise, s\'était rejeté sur cette grande rousse à tête de cheval, sans doute par calcul; car il la maintenait au rayon, pour l\'afficher, en la comblant de cadeaux.
ENGLISH    Just at this moment the door opened.
ENGLISH   \"Just put this other cloak on, mademoiselle, so that the lady may judge.\"  And Denise then walked slowly round, wearing the cloak and saying: \"This is warmer.
FRENCH   Et dites-lui qu\'il achèvera de se couler, s\'il s\'entête dans un tas de vieilleries ridicules.
ENGLISH   The young ladies husbanded their strength, prudently preparing for the exertion of the afternoon.
FRENCH    Lorsque Lhomme et Albert se furent retirés, en s\'épongeant le visage, Mouret demeura un moment immobile, perdu, les yeux sur l\'argent.
ENGLISH   Just tell me your little troubles.\"  Thereupon Denise yielded to this friendship so frankly offered.
ENGLISH   \"I simply try to deserve your patronage.\"  But they pressed him with questions: Madame Bourdelais, Madame Guibal, even Blanche wanted to know something.
FRENCH   Il devina toute la scène.
FRENCH   J\'ai crié, et le voilà qui se fout sous les roues!  Alors, un ouvrier, un peintre en bâtiment, accouru avec son pinceau d\'une devanture voisine, dit d\'une voix aiguë, au milieu des clameurs:  -- Ne te fais donc pas de bile! Je l\'ai vu, il s\'est collé dessous, parbleu!...
FRENCH   Tandis que le premier revenait se placer derrière Mme Guibal, dont il fouillait du regard le corsage, de son air correct et supérieur, le jeune homme se penchait vers Blanche, en tâchant de trouver un mot aimable.
FRENCH   Le repas fut silencieux.
ENGLISH   He went off.
ENGLISH   It was for woman that all the establishments were struggling in wild competition; it was woman whom they were continually catching in the snares of their bargains, after bewildering her with their displays.
FRENCH   Il ne restait qu\'à vérifier et qu\'à emballer, au fond d\'une pièce voisine, où une équipe d\'ouvriers clouait et ficelait du matin au soir.
ENGLISH   But never! I won\'t have it! that\'s understood.
ENGLISH    By the grey light which came in through the large vent-holes, a squad of men were receiving the goods, whilst others removed the lids of the cases and opened the bales in presence of the managers of different departments.
FRENCH    -- S\'il est permis de vous enfermer un dimanche, par un temps pareil! répéta Favier.
FRENCH   Ces dames prenaient par moments des voix aiguës, que le léger tintement des cuillers dans les tasses de Chine accompagnait; et l\'on entendait de temps à autre, au milieu d\'un court silence, le bruit d\'une soucoupe trop vivement reposée sur le marbre du guéridon.
FRENCH   Maintenant qu\'il était second, il marchait seul, au milieu du respect des simples vendeurs.
ENGLISH   Clara on her side bit her lips, and Marguerite turned away; Madame Aurélie alone seemed won over, and encouraged Mouret with a nod when he resumed: \"Your uncle was wrong not to bring you here; his recommendation sufficed.
FRENCH   Elle, en haut, rit comme une malheureuse...
ENGLISH    \"Plenty of customers over there at all events!\" was the remark which at last escaped her.
FRENCH   Et, pourtant, il ne s\'était senti à elle que le soir de leur promenade, sous les marronniers des Tuileries.
FRENCH   C\'était le premier qui ne lui faisait pas peur, tellement la maison paraissait pauvre.
FRENCH    -- C\'est un accident, continuait Denise, résolue à cacher la tentative de suicide.
ENGLISH    The private door which conducted to Mouret\'s apartments and to the assistants\' bedrooms was in the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! it\'s you,\" said she to Denise, with exaggerated amiability.
FRENCH    -- Ah bien! reprit à voix basse Clara, en voilà une qui ne pèsera pas lourd ici!  Mais elles se turent, une femme d\'environ quarante-cinq ans entrait.
FRENCH   Cette maison appartenant à la société Mouret et Cie, et le bail portant que le locataire devrait supporter les travaux de réparation, des ouvriers se présentèrent un matin.
FRENCH   C\'était un nouveau spectacle, un océan de têtes vues en raccourci, cachant les corsages, grouillant dans une agitation de fourmilière.
FRENCH    -- Oui, répondit tranquillement Mouret.
FRENCH    Il était légèrement pâle, les yeux clairs et résolus pourtant.
ENGLISH   It is too late for my luck to turn.
FRENCH   Sous les galeries couvertes, les briques apparentes des voûtins étaient également émaillées de couleurs vives.
ENGLISH   The latter had doubtless guessed the fresh blow which her daughter had received, for her anxious eyes wandered from her to Colomban, and then to The Paradise.
FRENCH   Deux caissiers y centralisaient les recettes, que, chaque soir, montait Lhomme, le premier caissier de la vente, et faisaient ensuite face aux dépenses, payaient les fabricants, le personnel, tout le petit monde qui vivait de la maison.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, ce serait ridicule, à force d\'être grand; les clientes se perdraient, pourquoi pas les Halles? Et, malgré les regards suppliants de sa femme, malgré son effort, il passa des travaux au chiffre d\'affaires du magasin.
FRENCH   Alors, elle rougit de sa précipitation, elle le reprit sur ses genoux, en disant que les hommes ne comprenaient jamais et qu\'ils n\'avaient pas besoin de savoir.
ENGLISH   However, I hold it at your disposal.
ENGLISH   But she must be here, we shall see her.\"  Surprise, however, made the ladies stop short.
ENGLISH   \"You\'ve come, then! How I\'ve been longing to see you since yesterday! I thought you also had abandoned me!\"  It was a piteous spectacle.
FRENCH    Le jour où Denise résolut enfin de lui donner congé, Bourras revenait précisément de chez son avocat.
FRENCH   Bonsoir, mademoiselle.
ENGLISH   This jovial fellow, with coal-black beard, this dissipated blade whose warm Gascon blood empurpled his cheeks, was thinking that fine ladies were not of much account after all, and let out a nice lot of things when they ventured to open their hearts.
ENGLISH   A few customers came, put the young ladies into perspiration, and went away without buying anything.
FRENCH   La porte demeurait ouverte, et elle sentait bien cependant le magasin entier qui la poussait.
FRENCH    -- Jamais je ne signerai cela, j\'aime mieux mourir.
FRENCH   Quand il fut devant son cabinet, il ouvrit la porte toute grande.
ENGLISH   His face became flushed and in his eyes was a little of that bewildered rapture with which the eyes of his customers at last quivered.
FRENCH   Ce fut avec son rire accoutumé qu\'elle présenta des sandwiches à Vallagnosc.
FRENCH   Il lui fallait strictement trente sous chaque jour, le loyer compris, en consentant à vivre elle-même de pain sec, pour donner un peu de viande à l\'enfant.
FRENCH   Au-dessous d\'eux, s\'étendait l\'immense vitrage de la galerie centrale, un lac de verre borné par les toitures lointaines, comme par des côtes rocheuses.
FRENCH   Elle se faisait plus de douze mille francs aux confections, tandis que lui touchait seulement cinq mille francs d\'appointements fixes.
FRENCH   Au bout, il y avait une petite commode de noyer, une table de sapin noirci et deux chaises.
ENGLISH   He had distributed some \"fingers\" of Brie cheese, and, as a treat for the visitors, called for a second dessert, a pot of red-currant jam, a liberality which seemed to surprise Colomban.
ENGLISH   \"We shall never get there.
FRENCH   Un instant, Mouret parut s\'absorber dans l\'énumération des articles, sans un regard pour la jeune fille.
FRENCH   Et il y en a des jaloux! L\'autre jour encore, c\'était un ouvrier qui jetait sa femme dans un puits!  Elle ne quittait pas Denise des yeux, elle crut avoir deviné, en la voyant pâlir.
FRENCH   Mon Dieu! il avait voulu mourir.
ENGLISH   With its continual rush of pedestrians on the muddy footways the whole neighbourhood reeked of dampness, exhaled a cellar-like mouldy odour.
ENGLISH   As there were three tables, one at half-past nine, one at half-past ten, and another at half-past eleven, he wished to explain that, belonging as he did to the third table, he always had the leavings, the worst of everything for his share.
ENGLISH   As for Deloche, he long contented himself with smiling at Denise when he met her; but, getting bolder, he at last occasionally murmured a friendly word.
ENGLISH   It was a rather large room, hung with red silk and furnished with a marble toilet table and a large wardrobe with three compartments and great glass doors.
FRENCH    Ce fut le dernier mot, qui sonna comme la note aiguë de la journée, dans la fièvre croissante des magasins.
FRENCH   Il sait que j\'ai couché avec, et ça ne lui est pas agréable; ou bien c\'est elle qui veut me faire flanquer à la porte, parce que je la gêne...
FRENCH   Hutin, étourdi, furieux, ne trouvant que Favier pour vider son coeur, lui jura qu\'il allait flanquer sa démission à la tête de cette brute-là.
FRENCH    -- J\'avais six ans, ma mère m\'emmenait dans une carriole au marché de la ville.
FRENCH   Ensuite, il conclut:  -- Ça la regarde...
ENGLISH   \"She pushed past me at the door, but I had already one foot in the room.\"  The matter in dispute was their inscription on the list of turns, which regulated the sales.
ENGLISH    \"No, no, uncle!\" she exclaimed, in a sudden outburst of her just and excellent nature.
FRENCH    C\'était l\'habitude patriarcale de la maison.
FRENCH   Alors, j\'ai pensé que Pépé et moi, nous nous tirerions toujours d\'affaire.
FRENCH    -- Ce que je m\'en fiche! Ils sont jeunes, ça les fera grandir...
FRENCH   Un grand maigre s\'étonnait: ça se faisait donc, ce mariage du patron avec la première des costumes? tandis qu\'un petit gras répondait qu\'on n\'avait jamais su, mais que les fleurs tout de même étaient achetées.
FRENCH   Il tournait fiévreusement, métrait les murs de sa maison, la regardait du milieu de la rue, avec des airs d\'architecte.
FRENCH   Depuis le commencement du mois, les départements donnaient, on ne voyait guère que des dames fagotées, des châles jaunes, des jupes vertes, le déballage en masse de la province.
ENGLISH    But despite all these occurrences which gradually awoke the woman in her, Denise still retained her infantile peace of mind.
FRENCH   Mais le défilé continuait, et pour échapper aux regards, elle fit lentement le tour de la place.
FRENCH    Il la traitait en enfant, avec plus de pitié que de bonté, sa curiosité du féminin simplement mise en éveil par la femme troublante qu\'il sentait naître chez cette enfant pauvre et maladroite.
FRENCH   La demoiselle est là.
FRENCH    -- C\'est M.
ENGLISH   Well! we\'ll see you again.
ENGLISH   Madame Aurélie gazed upon her with her large fixed eyes, not a line of her imperial countenance deigning to relax.
FRENCH   Laissez-moi pleurer, cela me soulage.
ENGLISH   It is really necessary, as you know, for there has been no demand for these velvets.\"  Mouret cut him short with a final harsh remark.
FRENCH   Qui vous en a donné l\'ordre?  Le second, qui menait grand bruit autour de ce travail, comme s\'il eût voulu accrocher le directeur au passage, en prévoyant la scène, répondit d\'un air naïvement surpris:  -- Mais c\'est M.
ENGLISH    \"So, it\'s that girl you love?\" she said painfully, when they were alone.
FRENCH    Il se tut, puis il reprit tout bas, comme parlant à Mignot, qu\'il ne quittait plus des yeux:  -- Va, va, mon bonhomme, frotte-lui bien les doigts, pour ce que ça t\'avance! On les connaît, tes conquêtes!  Il y avait, entre lui et le gantier, une rivalité de jolis hommes, qui tous deux affectaient de coqueter avec les clientes.
FRENCH    Lentement, le convoi s\'ébranla, pataugeant au milieu des flaques, dans le silence des fiacres et des omnibus brusquement arrêtés.
FRENCH    -- Ne mentez pas, je vous en prie.
ENGLISH   Mouret affected to arrange the papers on his table in order to conceal the trembling of his hands.
FRENCH    Elle plaisantait, de son air simple qui avait tant de charme.
FRENCH   S\'il l\'oubliait une minute en décidant de la ruine ou de la prospérité d\'une industrie, il la retrouvait debout, à un élancement de son coeur; sa voix expirait, il se demandait à quoi bon cette fortune remuée, puisqu\'elle ne voulait pas.
ENGLISH   And before commencing to sign the drafts laid upon his blotting-pad he darted upon her portrait the contented smile of a happy man.
ENGLISH   \"No, Mademoiselle Prunaire, I don\'t know at all,\" she replied in a mincing tone.
FRENCH   Les consciences inquiètes frissonnaient, les honnêtetés les plus sûres d\'elles redoutaient le coup de balai général.
ENGLISH    Denise had not noticed him.
ENGLISH    \"Dear me!\" said he, \"you are quite free to support those big tricky shows.
ENGLISH   He had just caught sight of Bouthemont, and nodded to him in a friendly way.
FRENCH   Et, brusquement, elle oublia son mari, elle ouvrit le sac, sortit quelques mètres d\'une étroite dentelle roulée autour d\'un carton.
FRENCH   Comprenez donc que je localisais la foule.
FRENCH    -- Non, laissez donc! un vieux toqué, un fou qui me forcera à le mettre sur la paille, lorsque je voudrais m\'en débarrasser avec une fortune!...
FRENCH   Dans sa tête raisonneuse et avisée de Normande, poussaient toutes sortes de projets, ces idées sur le nouveau commerce, qu\'elle osait effleurer déjà chez Robineau, et dont elle avait exprimé quelques- unes, le beau soir de leur promenade aux Tuileries.
ENGLISH   \"But I must not interrupt you, ladies.\"  Then all eyes were again turned on Denise.
ENGLISH   At first Mouret cried out that they must wait; but, at a word spoken in an undertone by the inspector, he immediately followed him, trembling and again mastered by his passion.
FRENCH    -- Oh! s\'il est permis! interrompait Mme Marty.
FRENCH   Les voix se perdirent au milieu du grand ruissellement de la rivière.
FRENCH   Derrière l\'oncle, à la marche aveugle et muette de boeuf assommé, il lui semblait entendre le piétinement d\'un troupeau conduit à l\'abattoir, toute la déconfiture des boutiques d\'un quartier, le petit commerce traînant sa ruine, avec un bruit mouillé de savates, dans la boue noire de Paris.
ENGLISH   Nobody was likely to pass that way; but the assistants were not allowed there, and she shuddered.
ENGLISH   \"Eh? Blanche, we\'ll just go through the shop, nothing more.\"  But they had hardly left the door before they lost themselves.
FRENCH   Derrière le rideau de pluie qui tombait, cette apparition reculée, brouillée, prenait l\'apparence d\'une chambre de chauffe géante, où l\'on voyait passer les ombres noires des chauffeurs, sur le feu rouge des chaudières.
ENGLISH   At first her parents had put her in their room, in the front part of the house; but the sight of The Ladies\' Paradise opposite affected her so deeply, that they had been obliged to bring her back to her own again.
ENGLISH   The gas was hissing in the lifeless, stifling air of the tiny room.
ENGLISH    \"Hallo!\" said Vallagnosc, quite surprised, \"you said that Madame de Boves was unwell.
FRENCH    Déjà Hutin rejoignait Favier, auquel il disait tout bas, de sa voix crue:  -- Hein? quelle désossée!  En haut, la jeune fille tomba droit dans le rayon des confections.
ENGLISH   What! he undertook to lower the prices of his own accord now! What did that mean? But in his turn he appeared greatly astonished, having merely talked the matter over with Favier, without giving any positive orders.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! Paul, old boy,\" repeated Mouret.
ENGLISH   Robineau who seemed nervous and uneasy interrupted him impatiently.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! sir,\" said Mouret, with his Provençal enthusiasm, \"the Crédit Immobilier\'s last operation was really astonishing! You cannot think how happy and proud I am to know you.\"  \"Too kind, sir, too kind,\" repeated the baron, still smiling.
FRENCH   Le premier avait pris, à l\'Hôtel de Smyrne, la chambre de Hutin, lorsque celui-ci, nommé second, s\'était loué un petit logement de trois pièces; et les deux commis venaient ensemble le matin au Bonheur, s\'attendaient le soir pour repartir ensemble.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, Denise, ma fille, est-ce possible? dit-il simplement, tandis qu\'il croisait ses pauvres mains tremblantes.
ENGLISH   Here and there the halls formed open spaces amidst the metallic framework of the spiral staircases and hanging bridges.
FRENCH    -- En voilà une sale baraque! répondit Favier.
ENGLISH   I\'ll explain----\"  But she interrupted him on perceiving Pépé, \"What! Pépé too! and his school?\"  \"Well,\" said Jean, \"after dinner on Sunday I had not the heart to take him back.
FRENCH   On fait des bâtons, mais des manches, c\'est fini!...
FRENCH    -- Mais il n\'est pas vilain du tout, ce chantilly! s\'écria Mme Bourdelais, qui tenait l\'éventail.
ENGLISH   And now in the darkness she surrendered herself to her sensibility, stifled by her sobs and thinking that if Hutin had been in Deloche\'s place and had said such tender things to her, she would have been unable to say nay.
ENGLISH   But now they are doing their best to snap up every branch of trade and ruin their neighbours.
FRENCH    Cependant, Mme Aurélie elle-même venait de poser le manteau sur les épaules de Mme Marty, et l\'on se récriait: Oh! très bien! ravissant! tout de suite, ça prenait une tournure.
ENGLISH   A white glimmer darted from the linen and calico department in the Monsigny Gallery, like the first bright streak which lights up the eastern sky; whilst along the Michodière Gallery, the mercery and the passementerie, the fancy-goods and the ribbons threw out reflections of distant hills--with the white flash of mother-of-pearl buttons, silvered bronzes and sparkling beads.
FRENCH   Il vaut mieux attendre.
FRENCH   Tous s\'épongeaient le front, l\'étroit caveau s\'emplissait d\'une vapeur rousse; tandis que les ombres des passants, continuellement, couraient en barres noires sur le couvert débandé.
FRENCH   Plus de la moitié des renvois se faisaient sur ses rapports.
ENGLISH   That\'s right, isn\'t it?\"  \"Yes, sir.
ENGLISH   However, the others got angry, asking Deloche if the girl was his property that he defended her in this way? What a brute he was! he deserved a good drubbing to teach him better manners.
ENGLISH    \"What a terrible mantle,\" at last observed Madame Marty.
ENGLISH   \"I must have a look at it.\"  Madame Bourdelais, who kept a cool look-out, in her turn remarked: \"Your remnant sales take place on Thursdays, don\'t they? I shall wait.
FRENCH   Et il dut céder, pour soixante-dix mille francs, ce qui lui en coûtait plus de deux cent mille.
ENGLISH   Denise stood there pale as a ghost, without saying a word.
FRENCH   Ce Mouret les ruine...
FRENCH    Et, les jambes cassées, il s\'assit sur une chaise.
ENGLISH   However, Mouret went downstairs again and entered the chief cash office, which was near his own.
FRENCH    Il devenait brutal.
ENGLISH   Meanwhile Baudu came out of the dining-room, behind his wife, who went to seat herself at the pay-desk.
FRENCH   Elle se désolait d\'avoir poussé les choses trop loin, torturée de jalousie.
FRENCH   Mme de Boves répéta sa question, et comme ils la congédiaient d\'un signe affirmatif, elle les enveloppa tous deux d\'un regard d\'assassin.
ENGLISH   And the flowers still ascended, great mystical lilies, branches of apple blossom, bunches of white lilac, a continual blossoming surmounted at the height of the first storey by tufts of ostrich feathers, white plumes, which seemed like the airy breath of this collection of white flowers.
FRENCH    Alors, le vieillard s\'emporta, secoua ses cheveux et sa barbe de fleuve.
ENGLISH   When the latter heard of Denise\'s dismissal, he was exceedingly annoyed.
ENGLISH   It would always be something, she would not go away empty-handed, she would make a friend of her doorkeeper\'s little girl with it.
ENGLISH   Having opened the glazed sash of the air-hole to change the stifling poisoned air, they were speedily obliged to close it for the cab-wheels seemed to be passing over the table.
ENGLISH   She wandered about the neighbourhood, frequently retracing her steps, indeed always coming back to the only spot she knew really well.
FRENCH    Pauline, sans se consulter, cria:  -- Sans doute, est-ce qu\'on peut faire autrement!  Puis, elle réfléchit, elle ajouta:  -- Pas maintenant, autrefois, parce que maintenant je vais me marier avec Baugé, et ce serait mal tout de même.
FRENCH   Ils arrivent chez Dumonteil, n\'est-ce pas? se réservent la propriété d\'un dessin, emportent du coup trois cents pièces, en exigeant une diminution de cinquante centimes par mètre; et, comme ils payent comptant, ils bénéficient encore de l\'escompte de dix-huit pour cent...
ENGLISH   What a spec, eh?\"  Hutin was meditating something spiteful; and when Denise passed near him, he stopped her, saying: \"Is it me you\'re looking for?\"  She turned very red.
ENGLISH   \"Yes, I\'ve come to have a look.\"  \"What a prodigious exhibition! It\'s like a dream.
ENGLISH   But beneath this change there could also have been found the awakening of an old ambition, a timid, gradually growing hope of in his turn swallowing up that Mouret before whom he had so long bowed.
FRENCH   Personne ne parut s\'apercevoir de cette porte fermée d\'un air si simple.
ENGLISH   And alone in the little drawing-room--which looked very coquettish with its hangings of buttercup silk--out of hearing of the ladies, and not even seeing them, except through the open doorway, the two old friends commenced grinning whilst they scrutinized each other and exchanged slaps on the knees.
ENGLISH   And then he made way so that his companion, a tall, pale fellow, of an aristocratic poverty of blood, might in his turn make his bow to the lady of the house.
FRENCH    -- Oh! je me porte trop bien, répondit-elle.
FRENCH   Elle s\'était engagée dans la galerie du blanc, pour atteindre les mouchoirs, qui étaient au bout.
FRENCH   Cependant, il était ébranlé, séduit, par cette voix jeune, encore frémissante des maux endurés, si convaincue, lorsqu\'elle indiquait des réformes qui devaient consolider la maison; et il l\'écoutait en la plaisantant, le sort des vendeurs était amélioré peu à peu, on remplaçait les renvois en masse par un système de congés accordés aux mortes-saisons, enfin on allait créer une caisse de secours mutuels, qui mettrait les employés à l\'abri des chômages forcés, et leur assurerait une retraite.
FRENCH   Il lui fallut s\'appuyer aux meubles, car elle boitait encore.
FRENCH    Mais, à cette heure, il entrait peu de monde, quelques rares clientes affairées, des ménagères du voisinage, des femmes désireuses d\'éviter l\'écrasement de l\'après-midi.
ENGLISH   And then he began to look for some chairs amongst the neighbouring skirts, laughing the while with his good-natured laugh, full of a brutal love for the sex, which did not seem to displease Henriette.
ENGLISH   All would be over if Robineau should not come in.
FRENCH   De toutes ces dames, Mme Marty demeurait seule avec sa fille, dans la crise finale de la vente.
FRENCH   Et les moindres rumeurs, les souffles les plus faibles, lui fournissaient ainsi des commentaires sans fin.
ENGLISH   The tone of this note, at once familiar and paternal, was in no way offensive; but it was impossible for her to mistake its meaning.
FRENCH    1.E.
ENGLISH   Moreover, in order to raise additional capital, he has induced most of his shop-people to invest all they possess with him.
FRENCH   Toutes le laissaient froid, il les traitait avec le dédain d\'un homme sans passion, dont le métier était de vivre d\'elles, et qui avait perdu ses illusions dernières, en les voyant à nu, dans les misères de son trafic.
FRENCH    Mme de Boves venait de dépasser la quarantaine.
ENGLISH   No doubt he had come by way of the Bois de Vincennes.
FRENCH    Sa grosse figure rieuse se rembrunissait, il regardait le tas s\'élargir par terre, tandis que Hutin répétait plus haut, d\'une voix sonore, où perçait le triomphe:  -- Soie de fantaisie, petits carreaux, vingt-huit mètres, à six francs cinquante!  Il y en avait encore tout un casier.
ENGLISH   The great revolution in the business sprang from this fortunate inspiration.
ENGLISH   She could not even be very intelligent, for he remembered her bad beginning as a saleswoman.
FRENCH    If an individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
FRENCH   Les confections sont en face.
ENGLISH   It was Pauline, who, having slipped away from her department under some pretext or other, had come up for a little chat.
FRENCH   Il y eut des cours le soir dans la maison, cours d\'anglais et d\'allemand, cours de grammaire, d\'arithmétique, et géographie; on alla jusqu\'à des leçons d\'équitation et d\'escrime.
ENGLISH    \"What are you doing there, sir, looking at the flies? Go and get paid!\"  At last, the storm burst one day on the head of Hutin himself.
ENGLISH    \"How stunning they are!\" murmured Jean, finding no other words to express his emotion.
FRENCH   Mon Dieu! quand on pense qu\'il n\'est pas même heureux!  Et, Denise s\'étant récriée, en lui assurant que son état n\'était pas si grave, elle lui coupa une seconde fois la parole, elle rejeta soudain la couverture d\'un geste chaste de vierge qui n\'a plus rien à cacher dans la mort.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s my husband,\" stammered Madame Marty, in great confusion.
FRENCH   Comprenez donc que ce sont nos affaires décuplées! En deux ans, nous rattrapons l\'argent.
FRENCH   Pendant ce temps, un col et des manches trempaient dans la cuvette, pleine d\'eau de savon.
FRENCH    Les femmes mangeaient à part, dans deux salles réservées.
FRENCH    Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.
FRENCH   Qui est-ce qui m\'a fichu un particulier pareil? Il était là comme chez lui.
FRENCH   Un succès!...
ENGLISH    On his way Mouret stopped for a moment before the slide, which was in full activity.
ENGLISH   \"Here are some Suède gloves at one franc seventy-five centimes the pair, first quality.\"  He offered his wares with furious energy, calling the passing customers to his counter and dunning them with his politeness.
ENGLISH    Up above, however, there was the same block.
FRENCH   En septembre, l\'architecte, craignant de ne pas être prêt, se décida à faire travailler la nuit.
ENGLISH   Her bosom bare, she murmured: \"Look at me! Is it not the end?\"  Trembling with mingled horror and pity, Denise hastily rose from the bed, as if she feared that her very breath might suffice to destroy that puny emaciated form.
FRENCH   Et le salon oriental, as-tu vu le salon oriental?  -- Oui, oui, extraordinaire!  Mais, sous cet enthousiasme qui allait être décidément la note élégante du jour, Mme Bourdelais gardait son sang-froid de ménagère pratique.
FRENCH    -- Alors, on portera du drap? reprit Mme Marty, dont le visage ravagé s\'embellissait de passion coquette.
ENGLISH   In fact it was a piece of folly, a thing that had never been seen before, and against which it was perfectly useless to struggle.
ENGLISH   A few gentlemen, lolling back in armchairs, were reading the newspapers.
FRENCH   Denise, de nouveau, resta seule, assise près de la porte, en attendant que son oncle pût la conduire chez Vinçard.
FRENCH   Aussi était-ce avec l\'émotion d\'un adieu, la pitié d\'une vieille camaraderie, qu\'il serrait les mains de son chef, en répétant:  -- Voyons, du courage, que diable!...
ENGLISH   Madame Aurélie was the only one who did not smile; it was as if Denise\'s splendid wild-looking hair and slender virginal shoulders had dishonoured her, compromised the good reputation of her department.
ENGLISH   \"Go and see, Colomban; I fancy I heard some one.\"  They had finished, and got up.
ENGLISH    Madame Desforges was at last reaching the first storey, when a still greater surging of the crowd forced her to stop once more.
FRENCH   Trois pelisses, surah, deuxième grandeur, à cent cinquante!...
ENGLISH   Interminable corridors ran along, lighted by gas; to the right and the left, the reserves, closed in with gratings, seemed like so many subterranean stores, a complete commercial district, with its haberdashery, underclothing, glove, toy and other shops, all sleeping in the gloom.
ENGLISH   Clara though delighted to have an assistant nevertheless treated her very roughly, hating her as she hated all the women in the shop.
ENGLISH   An involuntary smile played about Denise\'s lips; she breathed freely; it seemed to her that her bosom was throwing off a stifling fit of six months duration.
FRENCH   Oui, seul, entendez-vous! Il y en aura un qui ne pliera jamais la tête...
FRENCH    Geneviève, la tête penchée sur une épaule, comme si son épaisse chevelure noire eût pesé trop lourd à son front pâle, examinait le commis souriant; et, dans son regard, il y avait un soupçon, un désir de voir si Colomban, travaillé d\'un remords, ne rougirait pas, sous de tels éloges.
FRENCH   Des mains en l\'air, continuellement, tâtaient «les pendus» de l\'entrée, un calicot à sept sous, une grisaille laine et coton à neuf sous, surtout un Orléans à trente-huit centimes, qui ravageait les bourses pauvres.
FRENCH   Je crois pourtant qu\'il veut se retirer à cause de ses rhumatismes.
ENGLISH   He was not likely to get fat on his thousand francs a year, unless he sold something; as a rule he made seven or eight francs a day in commission, which with his regular pay gave him an average of ten francs a day.
FRENCH   Avant quinze jours, la trouée devait les éventrer d\'une large entaille, pleine de vacarme et de soleil.
FRENCH   Il n\'y avait plus de commis; la bonne donnait un coup de plumeau aux casiers; et encore était-il question de la remplacer par une femme de ménage.
ENGLISH   And whilst Monsieur de Boves succeeded at last in plunging into the crowd and disappearing with Madame Guibal, Madame de Boves, followed by Blanche and Vallagnosc, had the fancy to ask for a red air-ball, although she had bought nothing.
ENGLISH   He experienced a sort of lassitude, almost a regret at having once more relieved his feelings in this way.
FRENCH    Et il regardait Hutin, qui, pour conserver sa dignité de second, se tenait à quatre pas, sans se mêler aux plaisanteries.
ENGLISH   Would she leave? Would she stay? Bets of five francs that she would leave on the following Sunday circulated from department to department.
ENGLISH   Deloche also was said to keep company with her; they were continually meeting in dark corners and talking for hours together.
ENGLISH   One afternoon she met Mouret there and he seemed to follow her with a smile.
FRENCH   Ce capital passait quatre fois.
FRENCH   Ils s\'étonnèrent.
ENGLISH   That\'s quite enough for one day.
FRENCH   On a glissé ces dentelles sur moi, oh! devant Dieu, je le jure!  À présent, elle pleurait des larmes de rage, tombée sur une chaise, suffoquant dans sa robe mal rattachée.
FRENCH   Ce jour- là, elle pesait si lourd, il y avait tellement du cuivre et de l\'argent, dans le numéraire encaissé, qu\'il s\'était fait accompagner par deux garçons.
FRENCH   Sa face honnête, à la grande bouche molle, avait des yeux de ruse.
FRENCH   Elle lui rendit ses baisers, sans trouver une parole.
FRENCH   Alors, jusqu\'au déjeuner, toutes trois parlèrent des enfants, du ménage, de la vie à Paris et en province, par phrases courtes et vagues, en parentes un peu embarrassées de ne pas se connaître.
FRENCH   Mais elle tressaillit, elle lâcha la pièce, en entendant la voix de Vallagnosc, qui disait gaiement:  -- Nous vous surprenons, madame.
FRENCH    Cependant, Baudu criait plus fort, en accusant ce déballage d\'en face, ces sauvages, qui se massacraient entre eux avec leur lutte pour la vie, d\'en arriver à détruire la famille.
ENGLISH   That\'s enough of this useless talk!\"  It was like an awakening.
ENGLISH   Here in the diffuse light was a display made up of bright gay colours, of ravishing effect.
FRENCH   Tout défila, les agrandissements successifs, les gains remis continuellement dans l\'affaire, les sommes apportées par ses employés, la maison risquant son existence à chaque mise en vente nouvelle, où le capital entier était joué comme sur un coup de cartes.
FRENCH   Lorsqu\'elle vit le jeune homme, ses mains eurent un léger tremblement.
ENGLISH   For some time past her daughter\'s sadness had frightened her, she felt her to be dying.
ENGLISH   But it was such a funny pattern!\"  At that moment however, she chanced to raise her eyes and perceived her terrified husband in front of her.
FRENCH    Elle les lui laissa, ses yeux pâlirent, toute sa force s\'en allait.
FRENCH   Et que désirez-vous? On est à vous tout de suite.
FRENCH   Mais, par-dessus tout, ce qui assourdissait les gens, c\'était la trépidation des machines; tout marchait à la vapeur, des sifflements aigus déchiraient l\'air; tandis que, au moindre coup de vent, un nuage de plâtre s\'envolait et s\'abattait sur les toitures environnantes, ainsi qu\'une tombée de neige.
FRENCH    -- C\'est une idée! cria Mme Marty.
FRENCH   Son secret lui échappa, elle cacha la tête dans l\'oreiller, en murmurant:  -- Je l\'aime!  Pauline restait stupéfaite.
ENGLISH    \"No, you\'ll explain the affair to him yourself,\" was her reply.
ENGLISH   \"In fact, I intended to come and thank you for all your kindness to me.\"  On entering, she had perceived the million on the table, and the display of that money wounded her.
FRENCH    -- Alors, je suis perdu, répéta-t-il avec un geste tragique.
FRENCH    -- Dieu merci! dit le drapier pour conclure, si le père boit et court la gueuse, le fils a su apprendre ici le prix de l\'argent.
FRENCH   Ce sont ses frères...
ENGLISH   Had she wished for all this? Had she shown herself artful, coquettish, ambitious? No, she had simply presented herself and had been the first to feel astonished at such a passion.
ENGLISH    The footman announced Monsieur Mouret and Monsieur de Vallagnosc.
ENGLISH   With her good-natured cordiality there mingled a touch of respect, a sort of surprise at realizing that the puny little saleswoman of former days was on the road to fortune.
ENGLISH   And from under his bushy eyebrows the old man cast a side glance at Denise.
ENGLISH   And when Gaujean drew from his pocket-book a little square of silk, he went into raptures, exclaiming: \"Why, this is a handsomer silk than the Paris Delight! At all events it produces a better effect, the grain is coarser.
ENGLISH   For his part he drew his commission on the total profits, and it was not to his advantage that the prices should be lowered.
ENGLISH   Bursts of clear laughter rang out, faint cries of ecstasy were raised amidst the scolding voices of the mothers.
ENGLISH   Moreover the salesmen quietly accepted their precarious situation, obliged to do so by necessity and habit.
FRENCH   Il voulait des écroulements, comme tombés au hasard des casiers éventrés, et il les voulait flambants des couleurs les plus ardentes, s\'avivant l\'un par l\'autre.
ENGLISH   \"Justice, and nothing more, is my motto.
ENGLISH   Would they not shortly take advantage of some pretext or other and sacrifice her in favour of Denise? Her imperial countenance, puffed up with fat, seemed to have grown thinner from the shame which now stained the Lhomme dynasty; and she made a show of going away every evening on her husband\'s arm, for they had been brought nearer together by misfortune, and vaguely felt that the evil came from the disorder of their home; whilst the poor old man, more affected than her, a prey as he was to a sickly fear that he might himself be suspected of robbery, would count the receipts twice over with a great deal of noise, performing miracles the while with his injured arm.
FRENCH   Il y avait là, sous la lumière diffuse, un étalage aux colorations vives et gaies, d\'un effet ravissant.
FRENCH   Voyons, il faut nous entendre, ce serait un meurtre.
FRENCH   La femme de ménage ne venait que le matin et le soir, pour faire un peu de cuisine et pour l\'aider à ôter et à mettre les volets.
ENGLISH   Madame Baudu lay there with eyes fixed, full of that vision of the triumphal monument, those clear, limpid windows, behind which a gallop of millions was passing.
ENGLISH   \"Ah! now I remember the young person.
FRENCH   Cette canaille de Mouret vient d\'acheter ma maison.
FRENCH    -- On vous donnera le monde dont vous aurez besoin, Levasseur, finit par répondre Mouret, qui d\'un regard avait constaté le bon état du service.
FRENCH    Il ne répondait plus, le sang au visage, les lèvres serrées.
ENGLISH   Hutin, who on the contrary belonged to the classic school whose guiding principles were symmetry and a melodious blending of shades, watched him lighting this conflagration of silk on the table, without venturing to say a word; but on his lips appeared the pout of an artist whose convictions were sorely hurt by such a debauch of colour.
FRENCH   Et, sur un geste qu\'il fit pour l\'arrêter:  -- Laissez, monsieur, je m\'en vais...
FRENCH   Elle seule devait souffrir.
FRENCH   Il y eut une débauche de suppléments, elles s\'emplirent de confiture.
FRENCH    Et il parla longtemps de la sorte, se débattant au milieu de phrases contradictoires, en homme qui aurait voulu être deviné à demi-mot et avoir la main forcée.
FRENCH   Les rares clientes, qu\'un vendeur amenait là parfois, pour une commande, reprenaient haleine, brisées, effarées, avec la sensation de tourner sur elles-mêmes depuis des heures, et d\'être à cent lieues du trottoir.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! oui, dit-elle enfin.
FRENCH    -- J\'ai la femme, je me fiche du reste! dit-il dans un aveu brutal, que la passion lui arracha.
FRENCH    -- Toujours dans les chiffons! murmura-t-il avec un sourire.
FRENCH   L\'année était superbe.
ENGLISH   Besides, it appears that the clean sweep is to continue.
FRENCH   De nouveau, elle éclata en paroles dures.
FRENCH   Dès les premiers jours de février, Denise était rentrée au Bonheur, où elle avait eu l\'heureux étonnement de retrouver le personnel poli, presque respectueux.
ENGLISH   There were the brothers Vanpouille, pale at the thought of their December bills, met by a supreme effort which they would never be able to repeat.
FRENCH   Et, voyez-vous, je suis décidé à y laisser ma peau, plutôt que de céder.
ENGLISH   \"Just listen, we were stupid to entertain the superstition that marriage would ruin us.
FRENCH   Nous avons eu, la semaine dernière, la soeur d\'un pharmacien et la femme d\'un conseiller à la Cour.
ENGLISH   \"Why haven\'t you brought Jean?\"  \"Well, he was to have come,\" murmured Denise, in embarrassment.
ENGLISH   \"Shall I call some one?\"  But Geneviève nervously caught her by the arm, and held her back, stammering: \"No, no, stay here.
ENGLISH   \"Come on, Pépé.\"  All three, however, grew somewhat troubled, as if seized with fear.
ENGLISH   Formerly, whilst trying to establish herself in a shop of her own, her temper had been soured by continual bad luck; the feeling that she was born to fortune and encountered nothing but a series of catastrophes had exasperated her; and now, even after her success at The Ladies\' Paradise, where she earned twelve thousand francs a year, it seemed as if she still nourished a secret spite against every one.
FRENCH   Ses derniers gains passaient là, il n\'avait eu que ce vice, dans sa probité méticuleuse, obstinée aux vieux usages.
FRENCH   Je les cache tant que je peux...
FRENCH   On entendait le travail obscur de Favier, un gros bruit de mâchoires, étouffé sous terre.
ENGLISH   He was now boasting of being much superior to Liénard, because Liénard simply squandered his father\'s money, whereas he, Hutin, spent his own earnings, the fruit of his intelligence.
ENGLISH   But I think that you ought to go and offer your arm to Madame de Boves--that would be more sensible than causing a scandal.
FRENCH   Puis, sur des questions brèves posées par lui, Bourdoncle fournit des renseignements au sujet de la grande mise en vente des nouveautés d\'hiver, qui devait avoir lieu le lundi suivant.
FRENCH   Puis, on causa d\'une pièce du Vaudeville, où un calicot jouait un vilain rôle; plusieurs se fâchaient pendant que d\'autres s\'inquiétaient de l\'heure à laquelle on les lâcherait le soir, car ils devaient aller en soirée, dans des familles bourgeoises.
ENGLISH    \"Six francs, madame,\" replied Geneviève.
FRENCH   Puis, leurs yeux s\'accoutumèrent, ils virent à droite les troncs des peupliers, pareils à des colonnes sombres portant les dômes de leurs branches, criblés d\'étoiles; tandis que, sur la droite, l\'eau par moments avait dans le noir un luisant de miroir d\'étain.
FRENCH   Justement, une cliente se présentait, et comme Mme Aurélie venait de descendre au sous-sol, elle prit la direction du comptoir, elle appela Clara.
ENGLISH    \"Does he know about it?\" he resumed.
FRENCH   La bonne, vivement, avait desservi, et Denise s\'oubliait près de la fenêtre, intéressée par la petite cour, lorsque, en se retournant, elle aperçut Geneviève, toujours à sa place, les yeux sur la toile cirée, humide encore d\'un coup d\'éponge.
FRENCH   Jamais elle ne trouverait le courage de la recommencer.
ENGLISH   This was one of the most complicated and important departments of the establishment, and the rush was continual, for, strictly speaking, all the orders received in the morning ought to be sent off the same evening.
ENGLISH   The affair which had for months been occupying the employees, who were delighted at Denise\'s long resistance, had all at once come to a crisis: since the previous day it had been known that the girl intended to leave The Ladies\' Paradise, under the pretext of requiring rest, and this despite all Mouret\'s entreaties.
FRENCH   Le comptoir débordait, elle plongeait les mains dans ce flot montant de guipures, de malines, de valenciennes, de chantilly, les doigts tremblants de désir, le visage peu à peu chauffé d\'une joie sensuelle; tandis que Blanche, près d\'elle, travaillée de la même passion, était très pâle, la chair soufflée et molle.
FRENCH   Les mousselines, les gazes, les guipures d\'art, coulaient à flots légers, pendant que des tulles brodés, très riches, et des pièces de soie orientale, lamées d\'argent, servaient de fond à cette décoration géante, qui tenait du tabernacle et de l\'alcôve.
ENGLISH    The person who had so disturbed her was more than the manager of a department, it was Octave Mouret in person.
ENGLISH   But there, where the exhibition of white goods was snowing down from every shelf, they were almost stifled, and found it very difficult to get along.
ENGLISH   The show of white goods continued: cottons, madapolams, dimities, quiltings, calicoes, nainsooks, muslins, tarlatans; then came the linen, in enormous piles, the pieces ranged alternately like blocks of stone: stout linen, fine linen, of all widths, white and unbleached, some of pure flax, whitened in the sun; next the same thing commenced once more, there were departments for each sort of linen: house linen, table linen, kitchen linen, a continual crush of white goods, sheets, pillow-cases, innumerable styles of napkins, table-cloths, aprons, and dusters.
ENGLISH   Then he domineered over the customer, hastened to serve her so as to pass on to another, imposing his choice upon her and persuading her that he knew better than herself what material she required.
ENGLISH    \"It appears,\" explained Baugé, after listening to the conversation behind him, \"it appears that the students recognised the woman with Hutin as an old friend from their neighbourhood, who now sings in a music-hall at Montmartre.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle, au début, avait battu ses maîtresses, parce que, disait-il, elles l\'empêchaient de dormir.
ENGLISH   Monsieur Boutarel, when he understood matters, got really angry, crying out that he wanted his wife, and insisting on knowing what they had done with her.
FRENCH   Il finissait par voir des choses qui me faisaient peur, il m\'apercevait dans la rue, en guenilles, mendiant, moi qu\'il aimait si fort, qu\'il désirait riche, heureuse...
FRENCH   Du reste, ce n\'était à ses yeux que de la reconnaissance, elle se croyait uniquement touchée de la politesse du jeune homme.
ENGLISH   Whispered words were exchanged, Madame Desforges was advising her friend.
ENGLISH   \"Besides, there are certain expectations, we are waiting for the death of an aunt.\"  However, Mouret still kept his eye on Monsieur de Boves, who, seated next to Madame Guibal, proved most attentive to her, laughing softly the while, with an amorous air.
ENGLISH   This also was an old cellar, transformed into a refectory; but it had been fitted up with more comfort.
ENGLISH   They also had looked at her, and it was a sort of mute _dénouement_, the common end of many great dramas of the heart,--a glance exchanged in the crush of a crowd.
ENGLISH   \"She was very fond of him.\"  They again became silent.
ENGLISH   The idea of a marriage now irritated her, and she resolved to say no, and still no should he push his folly to that extent.
FRENCH   Derrière eux, le salon gardait son recueillement, ses petits bruits de plumes nerveuses et de journaux froissés.
ENGLISH   Thus, he still resisted the invincible logic of facts, preferring to die rather than yield, and inflamed by sudden bursts of fury against Denise, feeling that she was Revenge and fearing he should fall vanquished upon his millions, broken like a mere straw by the Eternal Feminine on the day he should marry her.
ENGLISH   Standing before a show-case of narrow black neckties, he appeared to be thinking deeply.
FRENCH    -- Bonne chance!  -- Oui, bonne chance!  III   Chaque samedi, de quatre à six, Mme Desforges offrait une tasse de thé et des gâteaux aux personnes de son intimité, qui voulaient bien la venir voir.
FRENCH   Il s\'arrêta en haut de l\'escalier central, il regarda longtemps l\'immense nef, où s\'écrasait son peuple de femmes.
FRENCH   Comme pour sceller sa promesse, il avait posé les lèvres sur la main de la jeune fille, qu\'il baisait d\'un humble baiser d\'esclave.
ENGLISH   Clara looked in a vexed way towards Marguerite, as if to predict that the new-comer would not have a very pleasant time of it in the establishment.
ENGLISH    \"Pray, don\'t speak of it!\" exclaimed Madame Bourdelais.
ENGLISH   Then bales appeared, toppling over in their descent like rolling stones.
ENGLISH   Then against the wall were grills large enough for the roasting of martyrs, saucepans big enough for the stewing of entire sheep, a monumental plate-warmer, and a marble basin filled by a continual stream of water.
FRENCH    Pourtant, la crise se calmait.
FRENCH   Laissez-moi arranger les choses.
FRENCH   Je ne vous reconnaissais pas.
ENGLISH   That day a nervous excitement must have interfered with his usually keen scent.
FRENCH    -- Non, laissez, je sais bien que c\'est fini...
FRENCH   Au lieu de le griser, l\'odeur des soixante-dix mille clientes lui donnait d\'intolérables migraines: il battait ses maîtresses, dès qu\'il rentrait chez lui.
FRENCH   Elle était immobile derrière la caisse, avec sa petite figure blanche, mangée d\'anémie, gardant le silence et le vide de la boutique.
FRENCH   de Boves, qui avait surpris sans doute le regard navré dont sa femme suivait l\'éventail, dit enfin son mot dans la conversation.
FRENCH    -- Mais elle est jolie! dit tout bas Mouret à Bourdoncle.
FRENCH    -- Voyez comme le Bonheur s\'est conduit à votre égard! répétait- il.
FRENCH    Il y eut un nouveau silence.
ENGLISH   Let her stay in the ante-room!\"  And, when the servant had gone, she quietly resumed her conversation with Vallagnosc.
FRENCH   Dites oui, Denise.
ENGLISH    \"Yes, I want to talk to you.
FRENCH   Il salua, il finit par dire:  -- Elles sont pour sûr aux dentelles, on ne peut les en arracher...
ENGLISH   All the chairs round the large table covered with newspapers were occupied.
ENGLISH    \"You are really too stupid!\" she retorted, laughing.
ENGLISH    Thereupon Bourras flew into a passion, shaking his hair and flowing beard while he shouted: \"Let him buy the house, he\'ll have to pay four times the value for it! But I swear that as long as I live he shan\'t touch a stone of it.
FRENCH    D\'habitude, l\'après-midi, Pauline et lui rentraient dîner à Paris, pour finir leur journée dans un théâtre.
ENGLISH   Thus it was with laughing joy that she received the slightest tokens of friendship, and this caused her to be really loved by some: she was so kind, sympathetic, and full of affection.
ENGLISH   Oh, of course he has his worries, like every one else, but he\'s an artful fellow, who makes both ends meet by his miserly ways.
ENGLISH   He at once set up a laugh.
FRENCH   Oh! je ne vous demande pas vos secrets.
FRENCH    Denise descendait toujours sans répondre, sans tourner la tête.
FRENCH   Là, amuse-toi, et ne le casse pas, si c\'est possible.
ENGLISH   And there, his forehead against the glass, he made another halt and watched the departure of the throng.
ENGLISH   Are you not satisfied?\"  She blushed, feeling a delicious happiness and embarrassment, in which all her original fright vanished.
FRENCH    -- Hein? quel monde! dit la première.
ENGLISH   What was the reason of those pleats which made the garment look so scanty? And that other one, square across the shoulders, why, you might have thought it had been cut out with a hatchet! Though people went travelling they could not dress like sentry-boxes!  \"Show me something else, mademoiselle.\"  Denise unfolded and refolded the garments without the slightest sign of ill temper.
FRENCH   Le blanc défilait: le blanc de coton, les madapolams, les basins, les piqués, les calicots: le blanc de fil, les nansouks, les mousselines, les tarlatanes; puis venaient les toiles, en piles énormes, bâties à pièces alternées comme des cubes de pierres de taille, les toiles fortes, les toiles fines, de toutes largeurs, blanches ou écrues, en lin pur, blanchies sur le pré; puis, cela recommençait, des rayons se succédaient pour chaque sorte de linge, le linge de maison, le linge de table, le linge d\'office, un éboulement continu de blanc, des draps de lit, des taies d\'oreiller, des modèles innombrables de serviettes, de nappes, de tabliers et de torchons.
FRENCH   On vous porte.
FRENCH   Mme Desforges déclara qu\'on ne trouverait pas mieux.
ENGLISH    \"There! what did I say!\" cried the first-hand, beside herself.
FRENCH   Mais beaucoup de personnes restaient là sans rien faire: maris attendant leurs femmes lâchées au travers des rayons, jeunes dames discrètes guettant l\'arrivée d\'un amant, vieux parents déposés comme au vestiaire, pour être repris à la sortie.
FRENCH   Seulement, elle est d\'un poète...
ENGLISH   \"And there\'s nobody here to warn us! You are all in the plot, on my word! We are robbed, pillaged, plundered.
FRENCH   Et Geneviève fut forcée d\'avancer, pour dire de sa voix blanche:  -- Que désire madame?  Mme Bourdelais voulait voir de la flanelle.
FRENCH   Clara Prunaire, fille d\'un sabotier des bois de Vivet, débauchée par les valets de chambre au château de Mareuil, quand la comtesse la prenait pour les raccommodages, était venue plus tard d\'un magasin de Langres, et se vengeait à Paris sur les hommes des coups de pied dont le père Prunaire lui bleuissait les reins.
ENGLISH   They were ever on the stairs and in the galleries; and at each moment some fresh meeting brought them to a standstill.
ENGLISH   However, she smiled and shook hands with both men.
ENGLISH   To-morrow we must send for the doctor.\"  Madame Baudu still remained motionless; but after a time, she declared, with her meditative air: \"I think it would be better to get this marriage with Colomban over.\"  He looked at her and then began walking about again.
ENGLISH    However, Madame Aurélie had closed the book.
FRENCH   Elle ne le vit pas, alla dans la galerie du blanc, puis traversa une seconde fois.
ENGLISH   Having met Mouret at a mutual friend\'s she had at first detested him; but had been carried away by the violent love which he professed for her, and since he had begun manœuvring to approach Baron Hartmann through her, she had gradually got to love him with real and profound tenderness, adoring him with all the violence of a woman of thirty-five, who only acknowledged the age of twenty-nine, and distressed at feeling him younger than herself, which made her tremble lest she should lose him.
FRENCH   C\'est à ne pas croire.
ENGLISH   Swear that there has been nothing between you and this fellow.\"  And as she obstinately remained silent, as if still wishing to open the door and go away, he completely lost his head, and gave way to a supreme explosion of grief.
ENGLISH   Some day The Ladies\' Paradise alone would cover the neighbourhood with its roof.
FRENCH    Depuis qu\'il était second, Hutin avait lâché les chanteuses de café-concert et affichait des institutrices.
FRENCH    Mme Marty et sa fille Valentine éprouvaient une désillusion.
ENGLISH   He gave Colomban high praise, calling him a solid fellow, firm in his ideas, brought up in the best principles, incapable, for instance, of joking with the customers like those puppies at The Paradise.
FRENCH    Pauline et Baugé restèrent perplexes, dérangés dans leurs idées, ne sachant plus que croire.
FRENCH   Vous voilà prévenue, n\'est-ce pas? Ne me faites pas mentir.
FRENCH   Qu\'avait- elle à étouffer ainsi, et pourquoi cette vaste campagne, où elle s\'était promis tant d\'insouciance, l\'emplissait-elle d\'un regret vague dont elle n\'aurait pu dire la cause? Puis, au déjeuner, les rires bruyants de Pauline l\'étourdirent.
ENGLISH   It was a narrow cell, opening on the roof by a skylight, and furnished with a small bed, a walnut-wood wardrobe, a toilet-table, and two chairs.
FRENCH   Fille d\'un piqueur des ponts et chaussées, absolument ignorante des choses du commerce, celle-ci avait encore la gaucherie charmante d\'une pensionnaire élevée dans un couvent de Blois.
ENGLISH   The manager, however, who always did things in a fitting way, decided that she should not be brought in, in order not to cause her mother to blush before her.
FRENCH   Puis, l\'aventure l\'amusait.
ENGLISH   Yes, she had never loved any but this man, whose mere look terrified her.
ENGLISH   Give me five francs.\"  He went out for a minute, and then returned to dinner, for Madame Baudu would not hear of his going away without taking, at least, a plate of soup.
ENGLISH   This was the most elegant of all the departments, a veritable drawing-room, where the goods, so light and airy, seemed to be simply so much luxurious furnishing.
ENGLISH   And there in the silence and the half-light he walked about unceasingly, with the same heavy step as at the two funerals; yielding to a sickly desire, to regular fits of forced marching, as if he were trying to rock his grief to sleep.
FRENCH   Tout le quartier, d\'ailleurs, en était secoué.
FRENCH    You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
FRENCH   Né à Dunkerque, fils cadet d\'un épicier, il était venu à Paris, presque chassé par son père et son frère, qui le jugeaient trop bête.
ENGLISH   At last Denise, who went every other minute to glance through the door leading to the hall of the house came back: \"Here\'s the doctor!\"  It was a young fellow with bright eyes, whom the doorkeeper had found and brought in.
ENGLISH   His passion, long restrained, goaded on by resistance, became stronger than ever, and he pressed her more and more urgently.
FRENCH    Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg-tm License.
FRENCH   Venez donc, que je vous arrange un peu.
FRENCH    Désormais, ses journées s\'écoulaient dans la même obsession douloureuse.
FRENCH   Lorsqu\'ils ne les virent pas reparaître, ils se soulagèrent.
ENGLISH   Why aren\'t you at Valognes?\"  In her sweet but rather faltering voice she then explained that since the death of her father, who had spent every penny he possessed in his dye-works, she had acted as a mother to the two children; but the little she had earned at Cornaille\'s did not suffice to keep the three of them.
ENGLISH    \"Look, mamma,\" murmured Valentine, \"it\'s too common.\"  \"Come to the silk department,\" then said Madame Desforges, \"you must see their famous Paris Delight.\"  Madame Marty hesitated for a moment.
ENGLISH   The idea of that woman who had met her death amidst the foundations came back to her; and she felt afraid, fancying that the lights were tinged with blood; but the whiteness of the lace quieted her, a hope, quite a certainty of happiness, sprang up in her heart, whilst the fine rain, blowing on her, cooled her hands, and calmed the feverishness within her, born of her journey.
ENGLISH   Pépé had thought that his uncle was getting angry, and they had to pacify him, by giving him some dessert, some biscuits which were near his plate.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! Pépé aussi! et le collège?  -- Ma foi, dit Jean, après le dîner, hier dimanche, je n\'ai pas eu le courage de le reconduire.
FRENCH   Cédant à l\'amertume de son abandon, le front contre la glace froide, elle regardait en face le Vieil Elbeuf, elle songeait qu\'elle aurait dû supplier son oncle de la garder; peut- être lui-même désirait-il revenir sur sa décision, car il lui avait semblé bien ému, la veille.
FRENCH   Comme je vous ai attendue, depuis hier! Je croyais déjà que vous m\'abandonniez, vous aussi!  C\'était une pitié.
FRENCH   L\'usine chômait, on supprimait le pain aux ouvriers; et cela passait dans le branle indifférent de la machine, le rouage inutile était tranquillement jeté de côté, ainsi qu\'une roue de fer, à laquelle on ne garde aucune reconnaissance des services rendus.
FRENCH    -- Dix-neuf sous, est-ce possible! disait Mme Marty, séduite comme sa fille.
FRENCH   Elle se laissa tomber sur une chaise: c\'était une lettre de Mouret, où il se disait heureux de son rétablissement et la priait de descendre le soir dîner avec lui, puisqu\'elle ne pouvait sortir.
FRENCH   Il faisait tout lui-même, pour diminuer ses frais: les nettoyages, les reprises, la couture.
FRENCH   Là, au moins, elle était perdue dans la foule, la fatigue l\'empêchait de penser.
FRENCH   Depuis quelque temps la tristesse de sa fille l\'effrayait, elle la sentait mourir.
ENGLISH   Twenty times an hour the battle began afresh in his distracted mind.
FRENCH   L\'affaire tournait au cauchemar; tout autre que la jeune fille, parlant en faveur de Bourras, aurait risqué d\'être jeté dehors, tellement Mouret était torturé du besoin maladif d\'abattre la masure à coups de pied Enfin, que voulait-on qu\'il fit? Pouvait-il laisser ce tas de décombres au flanc du Bonheur? Il fallait bien qu\'il disparût, le magasin devait passer.
FRENCH   Et vous ne la trouverez que chez nous, car nous en avons acheté la propriété exclusive.
FRENCH    -- Comment! c\'est vous, mademoiselle! dit Mouret, que Denise trouva devant elle, dans l\'escalier, une petite bougie de poche à la main.
FRENCH   Et, baissant la voix:  -- C\'est à vous que je veux parler...
FRENCH   Vous comprenez, nous serons certains dès lors qu\'ils n\'en négligeront pas une seule, car ils en inventeraient plutôt.
FRENCH   Ils parlaient de l\'acheter l\'année dernière, ils en donnaient quatre-vingt mille francs, le double de ce qu\'elle vaut aujourd\'hui.
ENGLISH   Little by little, Denise opened her heart entirely, spoke of Jean and Pépé, and of how grievously the money question tortured her; which led them both to abuse the young ladies in the mantle department.
ENGLISH   How wonderfully lucky that Mouret was! Paris saluted her star, and crowded to see him still standing erect since the very flames now undertook to sweep all competition from before him; and the profits of his season were already being calculated, people had begun to estimate the increase of custom which would be brought to his doors by the forced closing of the rival house.
FRENCH   Des satins clairs et des soies tendres jaillissaient d\'abord: les satins à la reine, les satins renaissance, aux tons nacrés d\'eau de source; les soies légères aux transparences de cristal, vert Nil, ciel indien, rose de mai, bleu Danube.
ENGLISH   At first he brought out some imitation stuff; but she wished to see real Alençon, and was not satisfied with narrow pieces at three hundred francs the yard, but insisted on examining deep flounces at a thousand francs a yard and handkerchiefs and fans at seven and eight hundred francs.
FRENCH   Enfin, nous en causerons, quand l\'idée sera mûre.
FRENCH    -- Avec ça que vous êtes bien, au Bonheur des Dames! Flanqués à la porte pour un mot! et un patron qui a l\'air de raccrocher ses clientes!  Hutin ne l\'écoutait plus, entamait l\'éloge de la place Clichy.
FRENCH    À son tour, il était devenu pâle, devant ce refus tranquille.
FRENCH   Au bout d\'un mois, Denise faisait partie de la famille, ainsi que l\'autre vendeuse, une petite femme poitrinaire et silencieuse.
FRENCH   Et il citait leurs voisins de campagne, les Lhomme, la mère, le père, le fils, tous les trois employés dans la baraque, des gens sans intérieur, toujours dehors, ne mangeant chez eux que le dimanche, une vie d\'hôtel et de table d\'hôte enfin! Certes, sa salle à manger n\'était pas grande, on aurait pu même y souhaiter plus de jour et plus d\'air; mais au moins sa vie tenait là, il y avait vécu dans la tendresse des siens.
FRENCH   Seule encore dans son grand salon Louis XVI, dont les cuivres et la brocatelle avaient une gaieté claire, celle-ci se leva d\'un air d\'impatience, en disant:  -- Eh bien?  -- Eh bien! répondit le jeune homme, quand je lui ai dit que je monterais sans doute vous saluer, il m\'a formellement promis de venir.
ENGLISH    \"What is the matter with him?\" murmured Madame Aurélie, quite overcome by his reproaches; while the young ladies looked at each other in surprise.
ENGLISH   Then the young man, by way of saying something, timidly ventured to ask in his good-natured, awkward way: \"What is your name, mademoiselle?\"  \"Denise Baudu.\"  \"My name is Henri Deloche.\"  Then they smiled, and, yielding to a fraternal feeling born of the similarity of their positions, shook each other by the hand.
ENGLISH   Things are looking well, aren\'t they? I fancy we shall have a magnificent day.\"  They went out and began their afternoon inspection of the crowded departments.
FRENCH   Seulement, il paraît que ça crève les yeux.
ENGLISH    \"No, thanks,\" replied Denise, \"we each had a cup of milk at a café opposite the station.\" And as Geneviève looked at the small parcel she had laid on the floor near her, she added: \"I left our box there too.\"  She blushed as she spoke feeling that she ought not to have dropped down on her friends in this way.
ENGLISH   There was an overflowing display; the name of The Ladies\' Paradise met the eye all over the world, it invaded the walls and hoardings, the newspapers, and even the curtains of the theatres.
FRENCH   Ils n\'auraient pas été plus cachés, plus perdus, en pleine campagne, sous des feuillages.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! all that\'s put on, you know,\" Favier was saying.
ENGLISH   Not wishing to go in with him, Denise, who had obtained what was called \"theatre leave\" which allowed her to remain out till past midnight, accepted Baugé\'s invitation to accompany Pauline to his home in the Rue Saint-Roch.
ENGLISH   Her smile died away, and she replied: \"Yes, sir.
FRENCH    Lorsqu\'elle eut compris, elle retira ses mains, elle resta toute sotte.
ENGLISH   Two women lodging on the first floor received visitors; and sometimes these visitors mistook the floor and came banging at Denise\'s door.
FRENCH   Au seuil de la boutique de parapluies, le vieux Bourras, chevelu et barbu comme un prophète, des bésicles sur le nez, étudiait l\'ivoire d\'une pomme de canne.
ENGLISH   More than half the dismissals were the result of his reports; and, rakish ex-captain that he was, with a big red nose, he only shewed himself lenient in the departments served by women.
FRENCH   Lui, très ivre déjà, tapait son verre sur la table, parlait de rosser le garçon, s\'il n\'apportait pas des liqueurs tout de suite.
FRENCH   Elle pleurait, elle trempait sa manche de larmes.
FRENCH   C\'était un dédain raisonné de méridional et de spéculateur.
FRENCH   Celle-ci demeura très surprise.
ENGLISH    \"It does no good to strike people,\" he murmured, phlegmatically; \"better wait.\"  They were both speaking of Robineau, the \"second\" in the department, who was looking after the shopmen during the manager\'s absence in the basement.
FRENCH    Les yeux de Robineau s\'étaient rallumés.
FRENCH   Elle examinait avec soin une pièce de Paris- Bonheur, car elle était uniquement venue pour profiter du bon marché exceptionnel de cette soie, si elle la jugeait réellement avantageuse.
FRENCH   Dans les comptoirs à vitrines, et sur les tablettes de cristal des étagères, s\'alignaient les pots de pommades et de pâtes, les boîtes de poudres et de fards, les fioles d\'huiles et d\'eaux de toilette; tandis que la brosserie fine, les peignes, les ciseaux, les flacons de poche, occupaient une armoire spéciale.
FRENCH    Le jeune homme, qui semblait redouter l\'entretien, attendait d\'un air gauche.
FRENCH   Maintenant, il les faisait illustrer de gravures, il les accompagnait même d\'échantillons, collés sur les feuilles.
ENGLISH   Bourras alone denied the facts, refusing to understand, superb and stupid as a milestone.
ENGLISH   The others remained at table before the greasy plates, rolling pellets of bread-crumbs and recounting the same old stories, amidst the sickly odour of victuals, which they could no longer smell, and the sweltering heat which was reddening their ears.
FRENCH   Mais, dès le dîner, lorsqu\'il traversa le réfectoire pour boire un verre de champagne avec son personnel, il reparut fiévreux, souriant d\'un air pénible, les traits tirés par le mal inavoué qui le rongeait.
FRENCH    Quand elle fut chaussée, elle essaya de marcher dans la pièce.
ENGLISH   She finished by trying to devise some possible comfort, her kindly heart dreaming of the means to be employed in order to save her relations at least from the final crash.
FRENCH    Mais il secouait sa tête chevelue.
ENGLISH    \"As long as I make both ends meet I don\'t care a hang about the rest,\" the latter resumed, whilst delicately shaping the dog\'s tongue with the point of his knife.
FRENCH    Et il expliqua la vieille haine qui mettait souvent aux prises la jeunesse des écoles et les employés de commerce.
FRENCH   Elle donna le nom, la profession, l\'adresse.
ENGLISH   It was like a Sunday revenge on the woollen gown which she was obliged to wear throughout the week in the shop; whereas Denise, who wore her uniform silk from Monday to Saturday, resumed, on Sundays, her thin woollen dress of poverty-stricken aspect.
FRENCH    For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
ENGLISH   This was the decisive blow.
ENGLISH   Perhaps he would believe that villanous story of a rendezvous with a man down in the cellars.
FRENCH   À quel théâtre êtes-vous allée?  -- Monsieur, je suis allée à la campagne.
FRENCH   Et, du coup, Vallagnosc se fâcha: il ne pouvait décidément rattraper sa philosophie compromise, toute son éducation bourgeoise repoussait en indignations vertueuses contre sa belle-mère.
FRENCH   de Boves réussissait à se perdre dans la foule et à disparaître avec Mme Guibal, Mme de Boves, suivie de Blanche et de Vallagnosc, avait eu le caprice de demander un ballon rouge, bien qu\'elle n\'eût rien acheté.
ENGLISH   Each time he arrived in front of the pay-desk, he looked at the empty seat, that well-known velvet-covered seat, where his wife and daughter had grown up.
ENGLISH   Liénard, whom his father had vainly recalled to Angers, was talking to the handsome Mignot who was now a traveller, and had boldly reappeared at The Ladies\' Paradise.
ENGLISH   And what made him especially anxious in the presence of this little saleswoman, who had gradually become so redoubtable, was that he did not in the least believe in her disinterestedness, in the genuineness of her refusals.
FRENCH   Et les étiquettes blanches des pièces étaient comme une volée de rares flocons blancs, mouchetant un sol noir de décembre.
FRENCH    1.F.1.
ENGLISH   No doubt he was thus manœuvring to save himself from being swept away by a power which he now recognised as superior.
FRENCH   Mouret affirma qu\'il vendait ces petites garnitures au prix de fabrique.
ENGLISH   Pray don\'t be anxious about me, the doctor says it\'s nothing.\"  Baugé, who had slipped away from his department, was also there, on the other side of the bed.
ENGLISH   They had awakened new desires in her flesh; they constituted an immense temptation, before which she fatally succumbed, yielding at first to reasonable purchases of articles needed in the household, then tempted by her coquetry, and finally subjugated and devoured.
FRENCH    Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm  Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.
FRENCH   Il murmura quelques mots à l\'oreille de Mouret, l\'affaire prenait une gravité exceptionnelle; et il le décida à conduire Mignot dans le bureau des inspecteurs, une pièce située au rez-de-chaussée, près de la porte Gaillon.
ENGLISH   She twice had found herself face to face with Pauline, who had offered her services, grieved to see her so unfortunate; and she had even been obliged to tell a falsehood to avoid receiving her friend or paying her a visit, one Sunday, at Baugé\'s.
FRENCH   Et puis, il n\'est pas désagréable de se ruiner, quand on est homme à rebâtir sa fortune...
ENGLISH   But great was her astonishment to find that Colomban\'s ardent glances were intended for Clara.
ENGLISH   \"I didn\'t recognise you.\"  Near the children sat a lady, her face hidden by the open pages of a review.
ENGLISH   At last she thanked Madame Aurélie, and on passing Mouret and Bourdoncle, she bowed.
FRENCH   C\'était ce qu\'elle appelait en riant «faire de lui un brave homme».
ENGLISH   But it was more difficult still for her to defend herself against Deloche\'s desperate affection; aware of all her troubles, he watched her, waited for her in the doorways.
ENGLISH   It was very mild, a bright ray of sunshine gilded The Ladies\' Paradise, whilst the bed-room of the old house shivered in the shade.
ENGLISH    \"We engaged you, mademoiselle,\" he commenced, \"out of regard for your uncle, and you must not put us under the sad necessity----\"  But all at once he stopped.
ENGLISH    \"He\'s happier than you,\" said Mouret, getting up.
FRENCH   Je ne te dirai plus que tout arrive et que rien n\'arrive, puisque cela n\'a pas l\'air de te consoler en ce moment.
ENGLISH   He was about to spend the day with a friend, a flautist at a petty theatre, in whose rooms a few amateurs indulged in a little chamber-music on Sundays as soon as breakfast was over.
ENGLISH    The trepidation within was now stifling all outside noise; you no longer heard the rumbling of the vehicles, nor the banging of their doors; apart from the loud buzzing of the sales nought remained but a consciousness that the immensity of Paris stretched all around, an immensity which would always furnish buyers.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien?  Il se mit à rire bruyamment.
ENGLISH   And then all at once a flood of tears forced her to leave the window.
FRENCH    Elle devint très rouge, elle l\'embrassa.
FRENCH   Le travail s\'en trouva interrompu.
FRENCH   Attention! la rampe était contre la muraille, il y avait un trou au tournant, parfois les locataires laissaient leurs boîtes à ordures.
ENGLISH   I recognise him, I remember having seen him in the Tuileries Gardens one evening with you.\"  Then his voice, which was coming more slowly, slightly trembled.
ENGLISH   How those scoundrels must rob people to be able to pay fifty thousand francs for a thing which wasn\'t worth ten thousand! And he defended his shop as a young girl defends her virtue, for honour\'s sake.
FRENCH    Mais des protestations éclataient.
FRENCH   Toutes les chances!  -- Un homme à idées, un brouillon dangereux qui bouleversera le quartier, si on le laisse faire! continua Baudu.
FRENCH   Le désastre s\'élargissait, on entendait craquer les plus vieilles maisons.
ENGLISH    \"There it is,\" said she; \"I didn\'t know exactly where it was.
FRENCH   Le baron seul, qui la connaissait bien, remarqua la légère contraction de ses lèvres et le feu sombre qu\'elle n\'avait pu éteindre au fond de ses yeux.
FRENCH   Puis, à l\'extrémité, il y avait une halte brusque, devant un guichet.
FRENCH   N\'était-ce pas une opération fantaisiste et imprudente, ce magasin gigantesque? Ne risquait-on pas une catastrophe certaine, à vouloir élargir ainsi hors de toute mesure le commerce des nouveautés? Enfin, il ne croyait pas, il refusait.
ENGLISH   Then, however, immediately afterwards, he contradicted himself, and talked of an alliance, an understanding between the small tradesmen to enable them to fight the colossus.
FRENCH   Quant à papa, il est trop tourmenté, il ne sait pas la peine qu\'il me cause, en reculant ce mariage...
ENGLISH   The draper was alone in the dark shop of The Old Elbeuf.
FRENCH   Ça ne fait rien, je t\'aime tout de même.
ENGLISH   But I was the only one who did! I was the only one!\"  Choking and bewildered, Denise stood listening to these frightful charges, which she had not at first understood.
ENGLISH   Baugé is going to marry you.\"  This was true, Baugé, who had left the Bon Marché for The Ladies\' Paradise, was going to marry her about the middle of the month.
ENGLISH   However, the boys never passed his door without calling out some insulting words, which he did not even seem to hear.
ENGLISH   Baugé is reckoning on it, my dear.\"  Pauline smiled with an air of conviction.
ENGLISH   Out of doors, the day was waning, a greenish twilight fell from the poplars so quickly that the landlord, unprepared for these repasts under cover, and having no lamps, was obliged to put a candle on each table.
ENGLISH    \"I don\'t know; but you must remember the time she was in mourning.
ENGLISH   But just as she was entering the street, Denise was again attracted by a window in which ladies\' mantles were displayed.
FRENCH   Depuis que ses camarades étalaient leurs plaisirs champêtres, elle étouffait, prise d\'un besoin de plein ciel, rêvant de grandes herbes où elle entrait jusqu\'aux épaules, d\'arbres géants dont les ombres coulaient sur elle comme une eau fraîche.
FRENCH   Il se troubla, s\'enfonça dans ses feuilles; tandis que Marguerite, pour étouffer le flot de gaieté qui lui chatouillait la gorge, criait plus fort:  -- Quatorze jaquettes, drap anglais, deuxième grandeur, à quinze francs!  Du coup, Mme Aurélie, en train d\'appeler des rotondes, eut la voix couverte.
FRENCH   Denise souffrait dans son étroite chambre, sous les ardoises.
ENGLISH   Monsieur de Boves was looking at the pictures, with the evident intention of losing his future son-in-law in the crowd as soon as possible.
ENGLISH   Then the piles of stuffs appeared symmetrically arranged, and the whole shop looked clean and orderly, brilliant in the gay morning light pending the rush of business which would once more obstruct it, and, as it were, reduce its dimensions by the unpacking and display of linen, cloth, silk, and lace.
ENGLISH    What caused the ladies to stop was the prodigious spectacle presented by the grand exhibition of white goods.
ENGLISH   For some time the complaints had become so frequent that the principals pretended to come and judge the quality of the food themselves.
FRENCH    La lutte des soyeux contre leur second occupait tous les comptoirs.
ENGLISH    Madame Desforges then slowly ascended the staircase, preceded by Denise; but after every two or three steps she had to pause in order to avoid being carried away by the descending crowd.
FRENCH   Au blanc, on entendait les chutes lourdes des piles de calicot; à la mercerie, c\'était un léger cliquetis de boîtes; et des roulements lointains venaient du comptoir des meubles.
ENGLISH   But after the success obtained by the Valenciennes she was unable to resist the temptation of taking out a handkerchief.
FRENCH    Mais le drapier haussait les épaules, dédaigneux de ces fables de nourrice.
FRENCH   Jamais elle ne pleurait devant ses enfants.
FRENCH   N\'est-ce pas, ils vivent ensemble?  Denise, dans la surprise de ces questions, balbutia, dut avouer la vérité, les bruits qui couraient au magasin.
FRENCH    Un jour, Denise sortait de chez les Baudu, lorsque, au détour de la place Gaillon, elle entendit un grand cri.
ENGLISH   It was the emotional hour of twilight, that quiet voluptuous moment which reigns in Parisian flats between the dying brightness of the street and the lighting of the lamps in the kitchen.
FRENCH   Elle était délicieuse à ce bal.
FRENCH   Vers une heure, des queues s\'établissaient, la rue était barrée, ainsi qu\'en temps d\'émeute.
ENGLISH    The policeman at once questioned the young woman, and she gave the victim\'s name, profession, and address.
FRENCH   Elle s\'abandonnait aux mains de Marguerite, qui la faisait tourner lentement.
ENGLISH   Another young lady late, thought she.
ENGLISH   Last year I had such an idea in my head.
FRENCH    -- Voilà, il faut que vous battiez en brèche leur Paris-Bonheur, qui a fait leur succès, cette année...
FRENCH   Il n\'y avait eu une baisse que sur les soies de fantaisie.
ENGLISH   The question was discussed every evening at the Café Saint-Roch until midnight.
FRENCH   Elle était brune, un peu forte, avec de grands yeux jaloux.
ENGLISH   He even showed himself so intolerable, after all the promises of good-fellowship, with which he had formerly warmed his colleagues\' zeal, that the latter were now secretly supporting Favier against him.
ENGLISH   Perhaps he belongs to a lady friend.
ENGLISH   Vallagnosc, however, even when he no longer feared an immediate arrest, did not accept the affair with this admirable coolness.
FRENCH    Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
ENGLISH   Hence his strong desire to make Baron Hartmann\'s acquaintance, as soon as he had learnt that the Crédit Immobilier had contracted with the authorities to open and build this Rue du Dix-Décembre, on condition that it should receive the frontage ground on each side of the street.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! dit Mme Marty, ce n\'est donc plus Sauveur qui vous habille?  -- Si, ma chère, seulement j\'ai voulu faire une expérience.
ENGLISH   The newspapers had said so much about this silk, that they had expected something stronger and more brilliant.
ENGLISH   The sample account book was duly approved of; at the top of each leaf on both counterfoil and bill form, appeared particulars of the department and the salesman\'s number; then also in duplicate came columns for the measurement, the description of the goods sold, and their price.
FRENCH   Mais répondez! quelle est cette femme?...
ENGLISH   The baron interrupted him.
ENGLISH    From that day onward, Denise put forth all her courage.
ENGLISH   \"No, no, you are not in my way.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! c\'est propre, mademoiselle, dit-il, les lèvres tremblantes.
FRENCH   Ce n\'est pas maintenant que la chance peut tourner.
FRENCH   Deux heures du matin sonnaient, puis trois heures, puis quatre heures.
FRENCH   Pour chasser l\'odeur de la nourriture, la buée chaude qui montait des cinq cents couverts débandés, on avait ouvert les fenêtres, dont les stores baissés étaient brûlants du lourd soleil d\'août.
ENGLISH    Although Madame Desforges was already acquainted with the new establishment, she stopped short, struck by the ardent life which that day animated the immense nave.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! et votre cocotte? demanda Hutin à Favier, lorsque celui-ci revint à la caisse, où il avait accompagné la dame.
FRENCH   Il y a plus de dix-huit mois qu\'ils nous encombrent, avec leur façade, où un homme s\'est encore tué l\'autre jour.
FRENCH    Et ces dames exhalèrent leur rancune.
ENGLISH   When I took my degree, just to please the family, I could have become a barrister or a doctor quite as easily as any of my school-fellows, but those trades frightened me, for one sees so many chaps starving at them.
FRENCH   Ensuite, on installa une salle de jeu pour les commis, deux billards, des tables de trictrac et d\'échecs.
ENGLISH   A sheet of light fell from the glazed roof of the hall, through which could be seen the intense blue of the sky.
ENGLISH   Wide-open and rounded like shields, they covered the whole hall, from the glazed roofing to the varnished oak mouldings below.
ENGLISH   The son of a tax-collector at Chablis, he had come to Paris as clerk to a merchant of the Port-aux-Vins.
FRENCH   Il était stupide, mais très bon pour les toiles.
FRENCH   Alors, elle eut tout à fait peur.
FRENCH   Elle tournait le dos, Mouret lui-même affectait de ne pas la voir.
FRENCH   Denise, dont les vingt-cinq francs d\'appointements fixes étaient chaque mois dévorés par les enfants, n\'avait pu que rafraîchir sa vieille robe de laine noire, en la garnissant de biais de popeline à petits carreaux; et elle s\'était fait elle- même un chapeau, avec une forme de capote recouverte de soie et ornée d\'un ruban bleu.
FRENCH   Quand elle se fut éloignée, Mignot cligna les yeux, en se tournant vers son voisin, auquel il aurait bien voulu laisser croire que des choses extraordinaires venaient de se passer.
ENGLISH   They were being covered with plaster, and business had quite ceased since the builders\' carts had commenced to block up the street.
ENGLISH   Her great fear was that they might some fine day send her to love her husband elsewhere, for the managers had decreed love to be execrable and fatal to business.
FRENCH   Cinq heures sonnaient, lorsqu\'elle se trouva sur le trottoir de la place Gaillon, étourdie, au milieu des fiacres et de la foule.
FRENCH   Son embarras grandit, elle traversa la pièce à petits pas et alla regarder dans la rue, afin de se donner une contenance.
FRENCH    Lentement, Mme Robineau tomba assise sur le parquet, dans l\'horreur de ces aveux.
FRENCH   Un monde poussait là, dans la vie sonore des hautes nefs métalliques.
FRENCH   Bah! je puis bien en prendre deux, ce n\'est pas ça qui nous ruinera..
ENGLISH   You see, we have come, uncle.\"  Baudu seemed lost in amazement.
ENGLISH   10, where Albert Lhomme was polishing his nails, pending the arrival of customers.
FRENCH   Oh! je me comprends, l\'ancien commerce peut aller rejoindre ces roses blanches qu\'on jette avec elle.
ENGLISH   Moreover, despite the loss of his arm, he played on the French horn, thanks to an ingenious system of claws; and as Madame Lhomme detested noise, before playing his instrument of an evening he would wrap it in cloth, and then draw from it all sorts of weird muffled sounds which delighted him to the point of ecstasy.
ENGLISH   Nevertheless, they continued walking side by side, and at last found themselves near the Rue de Rivoli, in a path where it was still light.
ENGLISH   As for the lady customers they took it more quietly, with an air of well-bred enjoyment.
FRENCH    Mais l\'entrée de Denise réconcilia ces demoiselles.
FRENCH    -- Remarquez, les épaules sont libres, disait Mme Aurélie.
FRENCH    Jamais d\'habitude, il n\'intervenait dans cet embauchage des employés, les chefs de rayon ayant la responsabilité de leur personnel.
ENGLISH   We enter the names of all who apply.
FRENCH   Mais, comme elle débouchait enfin sur la place Gaillon, la jeune fille s\'arrêta net de surprise.
FRENCH   Je vous remercie tout de même, mais j\'ai trouvé ailleurs.
ENGLISH   And the white tickets on the pieces looked like a scanty shower of snow flakes, dotting a dark December soil.
ENGLISH   She once more beheld the round table, the places laid on the American cloth, the window deriving its air and light from the dark and fetid back-yard.
FRENCH   Mais Bourdoncle avait entendu Mouret, et il le regardait en souriant.
ENGLISH   If he could only have managed it, he would have let the street run through his shop.
FRENCH   Mais vous ignorez donc qui vous aimez? Je n\'ai pas voulu vous chagriner jusqu\'à présent, j\'ai évité souvent de répondre à vos continuelles questions...
FRENCH    Comme Denise évitait les moindres dépenses, elle montait se coucher de bonne heure.
FRENCH   Des mois s\'étaient écoulés, la façade dressait maintenant ses lignes monumentales, derrière la vaste chemise de planches qui la cachait au public.
ENGLISH    \"There! there\'s something for the youngster,\" said he in his abrupt way.
FRENCH    Maintenant, elle se reprochait d\'être allée, l\'autre dimanche, chercher Pépé chez Mme Gras, pour le promener aux Champs-Élysées.
ENGLISH   Quite a plan was springing up in his head.
ENGLISH   Nothing but white, and yet never the same white, each different tinge showing against the other, contrasting with that next to it, or perfecting it, and attaining to the very brilliancy of light itself.
ENGLISH   A nervous revolt made his lips quiver.
FRENCH   Une exposition de soies, de satins et de velours, y épanouissait, dans une gamme souple et vibrante, les tons les plus délicats des fleurs: au sommet, les velours, d\'un noir profond, d\'un blanc de lait caillé; plus bas, les satins, les roses, les bleus, aux cassures vives, se décolorant en pâleurs d\'une tendresse infinie; plus bas encore, les soies, toute l\'écharpe de l\'arc-en-ciel, des pièces retroussées en coques, plissées comme autour d\'une taille qui se cambre, devenues vivantes sous les doigts savants des commis; et, entre chaque motif, entre chaque phrase colorée de l\'étalage, courait un accompagnement discret, un léger cordon bouillonné de foulard crème.
ENGLISH   \"In the first place, there\'s a light brown cloak in this parcel that Thérèse----\"  But he stopped, and Denise, on turning round to see what had frightened him, perceived Mouret standing behind them.
ENGLISH   He wandered about in a feverish manner, measuring the walls of his house, surveying it from the middle of the street with the air of an architect.
ENGLISH    \"And your pains?\" asked Madame Robineau, good-naturedly.
ENGLISH   However, the shopmen, surrounded to the shoulders, began to put each article back into its place.
FRENCH   Depuis leur débarquement à Paris, ils roulaient sur la place, ils commençaient leur apprentissage à droite, le finissait à gauche, étaient renvoyés ou s\'en allaient d\'eux-mêmes, tout d\'un coup, au hasard de l\'intérêt.
FRENCH   Enterrés, tous ces brocanteurs qui crèvent de rhumatismes, dans leurs caves!  Autour du patron, les commis qui vérifiaient les envois, écoutaient en souriant.
ENGLISH   \"Yes, reckon on that, and drink water!\" Hutin muttered.
FRENCH   En sortant de la lingerie, où la vente marchait plus mal encore, il tomba sur lui, il dut subir l\'expression de ses craintes.
ENGLISH   You could hear the picks getting closer, and the Rue de Choiseul and the Rue de la Michodière waxing quite excited over their condemned houses.
ENGLISH   She had spent two years at Valognes, with Cornaille, the principal draper in the town; and this Parisian shop so suddenly encountered and to her so vast made her heart swell and detained her there, interested, impressed, forgetful of everything else.
FRENCH   Comment! elle était partie depuis une demi-heure! d\'où sortait-elle? pas de l\'atelier, bien sûr? La jeune fille baissait la tête, songeait à cet acharnement du malheur.
ENGLISH   In a word Denise\'s reign was commencing.
FRENCH   C\'est décidé, nous ne reparlerons du mariage que dans un an.
ENGLISH   He was probably the manager of a department, thought she, for all the others raised their hats to him.
FRENCH   Jamais qu\'un à la fois, du reste.
FRENCH   Pourquoi m\'avez-vous amenée ici? Nous aurions mieux fait de rester dans votre chambre.
ENGLISH   Yes, you\'ll go and get paid like the rest, Bourdoncle.\"  And with a gesture he dismissed him.
ENGLISH   \"What, that old ape of an inspector! Ah! my dear, don\'t you trust him.
FRENCH    -- Comprenez-vous! je veux que dans huit jours le Paris-Bonheur révolutionne la place.
ENGLISH   On the second floor, he entered the forwarding department, seeking quarrels and secretly exasperated with the perfect regularity of the machine which he had himself built up.
FRENCH   On vous a dit que j\'avais des maîtresses; eh bien! je n\'en ai plus, c\'est à peine si je sors.
ENGLISH   That rascal of a Mouret has just bought my house.\" He was half mad, and was striking himself in the middle of the shop with such outrageous gestures that he almost broke the windows.
FRENCH   Pépé, à douze ans, la dépassait déjà, plus gros qu\'elle, toujours muet et vivant de caresses, d\'une douceur câline dans sa tunique de collégien; tandis que Jean, carré des épaules, la dominant de toute la tête, gardait sa beauté de femme, avec sa chevelure blonde, envolée sous le coup de vent des ouvriers artistes.
FRENCH   Elle fut reprise du frisson dont cette lettre l\'avait secouée, elle se voyait déshabillée par tous les hommes.
FRENCH   Maintenant, elle était toute seule, dans cette maison vaste, où personne ne l\'aimait, où elle se trouvait blessée et perdue; Pépé et Jean vivaient chez des étrangers, eux qui n\'avaient jamais quitté ses jupes; c\'était un arrachement, et les deux grosses larmes qu\'elle retenait faisaient danser la rue dans un brouillard.
FRENCH    Mouret dut donner son avis, il revint au milieu d\'elles, et affecta d\'être juste.
ENGLISH   Denise and Henriette, whom he had ceased to watch, were at last passing behind him, after having had a great deal of trouble to get out of the crush.
FRENCH    Alors, la lettre glissée entre les genoux, le coeur battant à coups profonds, Denise resta les yeux fixés sur la lumière aveuglante d\'une des fenêtres.
FRENCH   Un dernier effort, mes enfants, vous verrez la vente tout à l\'heure!  Bourdoncle, lui aussi, était là depuis le petit jour.
FRENCH   Hein? vous dites la caisse 10...
ENGLISH   It must be this girl--thought she--yes, this was the rival she had been curious to come and see.
FRENCH   Depuis longtemps, elle projetait d\'emmener ces demoiselles passer un dimanche, près de Rambouillet, aux Rigolles, où elle avait acheté une propriété, sur ses cent premiers mille francs d\'économie; et, tout d\'un coup, elle se décida, c\'était une façon de punir Denise, de la mettre ouvertement à l\'écart.
ENGLISH   Look at my arms; would you believe it?\"  Then with a trembling hand she again took up the water bottle.
FRENCH    -- Quoi donc, père Bourras? demanda le drapier.
FRENCH   Son sourire revenait, et il y avait, dans ce sourire, la secrète méchanceté d\'un vendeur d\'expérience, se doutant de l\'embarras où il allait jeter ces dames et la jeune fille.
FRENCH   Son visage se colorait, ses yeux avaient un peu du ravissement éperdu dont vacillaient à la longue les yeux des acheteuses.
FRENCH   Aussi, malgré le vacarme et le tohu-bohu de la besogne, les commérages passionnés allaient- ils leur train.
ENGLISH   The spacious room, so prettily and cheerfully furnished, became merrier still with these gossiping voices interspersed with laughter.
FRENCH    Elle s\'était assise, essoufflée d\'avoir couru.
ENGLISH   With respect to the excursion to Rambouillet, Madame Aurélie simply declared that considerations of propriety would not allow Albert to join them, and that the father himself would display great tact by refusing to come; a declaration which enchanted both men.
ENGLISH   And, as she was still turning the mantle over with a disgusted air, a little bit of the blue and silver selvage, which through carelessness had not been cut off, appeared under the lining.
ENGLISH   If he forgot her for a moment whilst he was deciding to ruin or support an industry, he found her again at a sudden twitch of his heart; his voice died away, and he asked himself what could be the use of this princely fortune since she still refused.
FRENCH   Elle la dégrafa et resta navrée de cette maigreur souffrante: la pauvre fille avait la poitrine creuse d\'une enfant, le néant d\'une vierge mangée d\'anémie.
FRENCH   Le tour de vente de Denise arrivait.
FRENCH   Son budget était réglé, cent francs par mois lui permettraient de payer la pension de Pépé et d\'entretenir Jean, qui ne touchait pas un sou; elle-même pourrait acheter quelques vêtements et du linge.
ENGLISH   His old experience rejoiced to think that men had in no wise changed.
FRENCH   Enfin, il se décida.
ENGLISH    \"What are you going to do with your land and buildings?\" he asked persistently.
ENGLISH    The department had laid out all its light coloured garments, summer jackets and capes, of light silk and fancy woollens.
FRENCH   Ce n\'est guère galant de vous enterrer dans les coins pour causer d\'affaires.
FRENCH   Tenez! du rouge! du vert! du jaune!  Il avait pris les pièces, il les jetait, les froissait, en tirait des gammes éclatantes.
FRENCH   Malgré le temps froid, les commis qui vendaient au plein air du pavé, ne pouvaient suffire.
FRENCH   Pourquoi vouloir ou ne pas vouloir, puisque jamais ça ne tournait comme on le désirait? Il donna en exemple son futur beau- père, qui comptait trouver en Mme Guibal une blonde indolente, le caprice d\'une heure, et que la dame menait à coups de fouet, ainsi qu\'un vieux cheval dont on use les dernières forces.
FRENCH    -- Je vais monter aux confections voir les manteaux de voyage...
FRENCH    Maintenant, le chef de comptoir, introduit chez elle par Mouret lui-même, y allait parfois prendre le thé.
ENGLISH   Madame Marty, surprised, could not understand such nervous horror of commercial quackery, for she was of another nature; she was one of those women who delight in being thus caressed by a public offer, in plunging their hands into everything, and wasting their time in useless talk.
FRENCH    -- Laissez donc Joseph tranquille, finit par crier Bourdoncle, et surtout ne répondez pas davantage...
FRENCH   C\'était le quatrième garçon de génie qu\'elle lui confiait, il finissait par se sentir ridicule.
FRENCH   Et, en attendant, il n\'y avait guère là, le soir, que la seconde des corsets, miss Powell, qui tapait sèchement du Chopin sur le piano, et dont le talent jalousé achevait de mettre en fuite les autres.
ENGLISH   \"You have a plan, no doubt.
FRENCH   Une chaise heureusement le reçut; tandis que le choc faisait rouler une carafe de vin, qui éclaboussa la cravate blanche et trempa le ruban rouge.
ENGLISH   \"Oh! you may speak out; I have no claim on your affections.
FRENCH    Une flamme de jalousie éclaira les beaux yeux d\'Henriette.
ENGLISH   Then, on reaching the principal gallery, she raised her eyes.
FRENCH    Quand elle revint, la scène recommença.
FRENCH   Et, là, il avait autorisé un de ses vendeurs à exposer, sur une petite table, des curiosités de la Chine et du Japon, quelques bibelots à bas prix, que les clientes s\'arrachaient.
ENGLISH   Thus, despite the bustle and uproar of the work, the impassioned gossiping went on everywhere.
FRENCH   Est-ce que c\'est vous qu\'on déteste!  Elle le sentit amical et furieux, comme autrefois.
ENGLISH   Mouret felt that his machine was again setting to work beneath him, getting up steam and reviving to activity, from the pay-desks where gold was jingling, and the tables where messengers were hurriedly packing up goods, to the delivery-room in the basement, which was quickly filling with the parcels sent down to it, its subterraneous rumble seeming to shake the whole house.
ENGLISH    Thus Bourdoncle could never now catch sight of her, with her clear eyes, sweet face, and simple attitude, without experiencing a real fear, as if he had before him some disguised female flesh-eater, the sombre enigma of woman, Death in the guise of a virgin.
FRENCH   Mais que répondriez- vous, si je vous conseillais de dire oui? Hein? vous m\'enverriez coucher...
FRENCH   De grandes ombres flottaient, on distinguait mal les amoncellements de marchandises, qui prenaient des profils effrayants, colonnes écroulées, bêtes accroupies, voleurs à l\'affût.
ENGLISH   Then she looked towards her father.
ENGLISH   \"It won\'t cost you so much.\"  \"It\'s true that the trimmings and making-up----\" murmured Madame Marty.
FRENCH    -- Chut! dix-sept! dit-il vivement à son collègue, pour le prévenir par ce cri consacré de l\'approche de Mouret et de Bourdoncle.
ENGLISH    \"What do you desire, madame?\" asked Mignot, on seeing Madame Marty planted before the cottage.
ENGLISH   When Mouret had advised his people to put their money into the business, Bourdoncle had been one of the first to do so, even investing in the establishment the proceeds of an unexpected legacy left him by an aunt; and little by little, after passing through all the various stages, such as salesman, second, and then first-hand in the silk department, he had become one of Octave\'s most cherished and influential lieutenants, one of the six intéressés[1] who assisted him to govern The Ladies\' Paradise--forming something like a privy council under an absolute king.
ENGLISH   And as Robineau replied that there wasn\'t enough room to store things away, Mouret exclaimed with a smile:  \"Ah! I told you so, Bourdoncle, the place is already too small.
ENGLISH   The shawl and the woollen departments suffered especially; seven employees disappeared from them in one week.
ENGLISH   Marguerite, on the contrary, behaved very well, and was not known to have any lover; which caused some surprise, for all knew of the circumstances which had led to her arrival in Paris.
ENGLISH   Hang me! I\'ll let the first that passes in for twenty yards of Paris Delight!\"  They continued talking for a few minutes, relating what they had done on the previous day, and what they intended to do on the ensuing Sunday.
ENGLISH   The future is ours.\"  \"And besides, what matters, if you have done what you wanted to do?\" she resumed.
ENGLISH   \"A thousand francs! that isn\'t to be refused.
ENGLISH   It seemed as if the hovel, obstinately remaining in the midst of these demolitions, would suddenly split to pieces.
FRENCH    Ses larmes coulaient de nouveau, il tâchait d\'affermir sa voix.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! dit Mme Guibal, en s\'arrêtant encore devant la première caisse, au milieu des poussées, c\'est une idée gentille, ces violettes!  Elle parlait de la nouvelle prime du Bonheur, une idée de Mouret dont il menait tapage dans les journaux, de petits bouquets de violettes blanches, achetés par milliers à Nice et distribués à toute cliente qui faisait le moindre achat.
ENGLISH   Each man has his own ideas, fortunately.
ENGLISH   When she should once have got the young girl in her room, she would find some reason for calling Mouret, and would then act.
FRENCH   Le baron Hartmann lui demanda si le manteau allait enfin; et, sans se troubler, Mouret répondit qu\'il y renonçait pour son compte.
FRENCH   Quand vous trouverez mieux, vous me lâcherez.
FRENCH   Seulement, il était las, le fardeau lui semblait trop lourd, des supplications perçaient dans sa voix balbutiante.
FRENCH   Je crois que Caroline, un peu romanesque elle aussi, a dû être prise par les projets extravagants du monsieur...
FRENCH    -- Alors, vous finirez par boire l\'argent de Paris, comme on boit un verre d\'eau?  -- Sans doute.
ENGLISH   A fine dust rose from the floor, laden with _odore di femina_, a penetrating perfume, which seemed like the incense of this temple raised for the worship of woman.
ENGLISH   Hutin rid himself of his bottle and laid down his plate; then, after taking his napkin from the bottom of a set of pigeon-holes, the sole ornament on the walls, he heaved a sigh and sat down.
FRENCH   Sais-tu que mon chef de rayon, à la soie, touchera plus de douze mille francs cette année? Parfaitement! un garçon d\'une intelligence très nette, qui s\'en est tenu à l\'orthographe et aux quatre règles...
ENGLISH   Wait a minute,\" she said.
FRENCH   Tout à l\'heure...
ENGLISH   The wife said, didn\'t she? that she had made nearly twenty thousand francs this year, and that had enabled her to take my poor house.
ENGLISH   Look, over there in the sideboard.\"  When she got hold of the bottle, she drank a large glassful right off, keeping Denise away with one hand.
FRENCH    Sous la lumière vive du hall central, au comptoir des soieries, deux jeunes gens causaient à voix basse.
FRENCH    Puis, changeant de conversation, se montrant plus aimable encore:  -- Et ce concert, l\'autre jour?...
FRENCH   Écoute ça, ma fille: je suis comme cette carafe, je ne bouge pas.
ENGLISH   \"If you only knew what trouble I am in! Since I received that letter, I have felt beside myself.
ENGLISH   He feverishly went through the three offices, questioning Levasseur, the chief, as to the weight of the correspondence; now it was eighty, now ninety, sometimes, on a Monday, a hundred pounds.
ENGLISH   Like all young men in the drapery line, he had a mania for spending, battling throughout the week with a miser\'s greediness, with the sole object of squandering his money on Sundays on the race-courses or in the restaurants and dancing-saloons.
FRENCH    -- Je ne songe plus à elle, mon cher.
ENGLISH   You must be right; it will be better to put more money into your business, than to risk this competition with the Grand Hôtel, which is hazardous.\"  Mouret\'s excitement at once subsided and he thanked the baron, but without any of his usual enthusiasm; and the other saw him turn his eyes towards the door of the next room, again a prey to the secret anxiety which he was concealing.
ENGLISH   \"And what can we show you? You shall be attended to at once.\" Then, turning round she added: \"Now, young ladies!\"  Denise approached; but Clara had sprung forward.
FRENCH   Était-ce possible? voilà qu\'il était entré dans une famille de voleuses! Un mariage stupide qu\'il avait bâclé, afin d\'être agréable au père! Surpris de cette violence d\'enfant maladif, Mouret le regardait pleurer, en se rappelant l\'ancienne pose de son pessimisme.
ENGLISH   If I were you----\" said Pauline.
ENGLISH   It was abominable, and she roundly accused the under-linen department of having laid a trap for Albert.
FRENCH   Puis, elle expliqua qu\'on ne pouvait être jalouse d\'un homme dans une pareille position.
ENGLISH   I look like a wet nurse!\"  Denise, losing all patience thereupon made a rather unfortunate remark: \"You are rather stout, madame.
ENGLISH    \"Well, madame, this is Paris Delight.
ENGLISH   I\'ve some work for you.\"  Since the terrible blow which The Ladies\' Paradise had dealt him by opening an umbrella department, Bourras had ceased to employ any workwomen.
ENGLISH    \"Tell me, must I go on my knees?\" he repeated, almost choked by suppressed tears.
ENGLISH    \"She\'s looking for Robineau,\" said Favier.
ENGLISH   \"But we shan\'t get any air then.\"  And indeed they were almost stifled.
ENGLISH   I felt the ground shake.
ENGLISH   Besides, you don\'t know how to dress yourself.
FRENCH   Mettez ça sur vos épaules.
ENGLISH    \"Later on,\" he replied, \"when I am able to keep my promises.\"  She made no gestures but simply remarked: \"It will be our daughter\'s death.\"  Baudu restrained himself though hot with anger.
ENGLISH    He looked at her, and replied in his calm voice: \"Why so, madame? Isn\'t it better for her to marry an honest, hard-working messenger than to run the risk of being picked up by some good-for-nothing fellow outside?\"  Vallagnosc wished to interfere, for the sake of a joke.
ENGLISH   \"Wonderful!\"  They did not weary of this song in praise of whiteness which the goods of the entire establishment were singing.
ENGLISH   \"The mantle department will then be in front of you.\"  This caressing politeness affected Denise deeply.
FRENCH     Section 3.
ENGLISH    \"Monsieur Bourras!\" said Denise, kindly.
FRENCH   Des piquets de fleurs garnissaient le bas, des violettes, des muguets, des jacinthes, des marguerites, toutes les blancheurs délicates des plates-bandes.
FRENCH   Celui-ci se trouvait sur les chantiers de la nouvelle façade, rue du Dix-Décembre.
FRENCH    -- M.
FRENCH    Mais Baudu surveillait la table avec autorité.
FRENCH   Elle a trois centimètres, et délicieuse, n\'est-ce pas?...
FRENCH    -- Tenez! le voilà, dit-elle.
FRENCH    Et, comme elle le remerciait, dans une nouvelle crise de larmes:  -- Taisez-vous donc! ...
ENGLISH   In her department, as in the others, nothing but Denise\'s departure was being talked of; and the first-hand was quite ill over it, for she had been reckoning on the protection of her former saleswoman.
FRENCH   Je resterai, quand ils feraient éclater mon toit et que la pluie tomberait à seaux dans mon lit!  Ce fut à ce moment que Mouret fit faire à Bourras de nouvelles propositions: on grossissait le chiffre, on achetait son fonds et le droit au bail cinquante mille francs.
ENGLISH   I\'m sick of them.\"  But just then Hutin rushed forward, for it was his turn, and he had recognised \"the pretty lady,\" the lovely blonde thus nicknamed by the department which knew nothing about her, not even her name.
FRENCH   Mais quand elle fut rentrée dans ce pauvre vêtement à elle, une émotion l\'étrangla, les sanglots qu\'elle contenait depuis le matin crevèrent brusquement en un flot de larmes chaudes.
FRENCH   Puis, nous autres qui employons parfois des façonniers ayant dix ou quinze métiers, nous sommes davantage maîtres de la production, au point de vue du stock; tandis que les grands fabricants se trouvent obligés d\'avoir de continuels débouchés, les plus larges et les plus rapides possible...
ENGLISH   However, what appeared to have most effect on these gentlemen, was the rumour of Robineau\'s friendly relations with Gaujean; the latter, it was said, was urging the former to set up for himself in the neighbourhood, offering him any amount of credit, to run in opposition to The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   D\'où venait-elle encore? cette fois, elle ne dirait peut-être pas qu\'elle était montée à l\'atelier.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle les découvrit le premier.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! vous ne faites rien maintenant, vous regardez passer le monde?...
FRENCH   Dès demain, vous la remplacerez comme seconde.
FRENCH   Comme la grande Clara allait le chercher, Mouret arriva, toujours suivi de Bourdoncle.
FRENCH   Et, comme elle retournait toujours la rotonde de son air dégoûté, un petit bout de la lisière bleu et argent, échappé aux ciseaux, parut sous la doublure.
ENGLISH   Denise glanced at the windows of his shop where the sticks and umbrellas were arranged in straight lines.
FRENCH   Maintenant, le monstre lui avait tout pris, sa maison, sa fille; elle-même s\'en était allée peu à peu avec le Vieil Elbeuf, perdant de sa vie à mesure qu\'il perdait de sa clientèle; le jour où il râlait, elle n\'avait plus d\'haleine.
FRENCH   Marty est le plus galant des hommes.
FRENCH   Mouret, justement, venait d\'encombrer le palier d\'un déballage d\'articles de Paris, des coupes montées sur du zinc doré, des nécessaires et des caves à liqueur de camelote, trouvant qu\'on y circulait trop librement, que la foule ne s\'y étouffait pas.
FRENCH   Robineau, usant des armes de son adversaire, avait fait de la publicité dans les journaux.
ENGLISH   \"See! he\'s fuming over there, at the top of the grand staircase.\"  The young ladies went to look at him.
ENGLISH   Even at this moment she was the sole object of his anxiety, and he was telling himself that he preferred to be there to protect her, notwithstanding his fear of some regrettable scene with the one he was following.
ENGLISH   Last night Madame Desforges promised to introduce me to some one who may be useful.
ENGLISH   \"You are making us die of curiosity.\"  And they were surrounding him, when Henriette observed that he had not even taken a cup of tea.
ENGLISH   He accused the big establishments of ruining French manufactures; three or four laid down the law, reigning like masters over the market; and he gave it as his opinion that the only way to fight them was to favour the small traders; above all, those who dealt in specialties, for to them the future belonged.
FRENCH   Mais il ne faut pas que je vous dérange, mesdames.
FRENCH   Alors, je suis bien entré, mais je n\'ai rien dit à personne.
FRENCH    Justement, lorsque Bourdoncle, ce jour-là, entra dans le cabinet de Mouret, vers trois heures, selon son habitude, il le surprit les coudes sur le bureau, les poings sur les yeux, tellement absorbé, qu\'il dut le toucher à l\'épaule.
ENGLISH    \"Stand upright,\" said Madame Aurélie.
FRENCH   Mais ce qui parut toucher ces messieurs davantage, ce fut le bruit des bons rapports de Robineau avec Gaujean: celui-ci, disait-on, poussait le premier à s\'établir à son compte dans le quartier, lui offrait les crédits les plus larges, afin de battre en brèche le Bonheur des Dames.
ENGLISH   The furniture dealers, who were much calmer, affected to joke at these counter-jumpers who wanted to meddle with such articles as chairs and tables; but customers were already leaving them, and the success of Mouret\'s department threatened to be a formidable one.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle meanwhile cast side glances at his companion, feeling anxious at this last display of energy and watching his lips to catch the least sign of suffering.
FRENCH   Ce fut, d\'ailleurs, une soirée pénible.
ENGLISH   It was her uncle Baudu, with his yellow face and aged look.
FRENCH   Sa douceur et sa modestie achevèrent la conquête.
ENGLISH   However, the eye soon became accustomed to this unique whiteness; to the left, in the Monsigny Gallery, white promontories of cotton and calico jutted out, with white rocks formed of sheets, napkins, and handkerchiefs; whilst to the right, in the Michodière Gallery, occupied by the mercery, the hosiery, and the woollen goods, were erections of mother of pearl buttons, a grand decoration composed of white socks and one whole room covered with white swanskin illumined by a stream of light from the distance.
ENGLISH   Have you no faith in me, that you have given up telling me your worries?\"  Thereupon Denise, in the emotion that was swelling her bosom--an emotion she could not control--abandoned herself to her feelings.
ENGLISH   \"If he works as well as he eats, he\'ll make a fine fellow.
FRENCH   Un instant, Deloche causait, appuyé d\'une épaule contre le réservoir, dans le continuel abandon de son grand corps ployé de fatigue.
FRENCH   Comme il se hâtait, il rattrapa Deloche et Liénard, montés avant lui; alors, il se rabattit sur Mignot, qui le suivait.
FRENCH   Elle avait battu le rayon des meubles qu\'une exposition de mobiliers blancs laqués changeait en vaste chambre de jeune fille, les rubans et les fichus dressant des colonnades blanches tendues de vélums blancs, la mercerie et la passementerie aux effilés blancs qui encadraient d\'ingénieux trophées patiemment composés de cartes à boutons et de paquets d\'aiguilles, la bonneterie où l\'on s\'étouffait cette année-là, pour voir un motif de décoration immense, le nom resplendissant du Bonheur des Dames, des lettres de trois mètres de haut, faites de chaussettes blanches, sur un fond de chaussettes rouges.
ENGLISH   I can do as I like, can I not? I don\'t wish to, that\'s all!\"  As she finished speaking, she was surprised to hear a creaking noise, and on turning round saw the door slowly closing.
ENGLISH   However, the scandal was hushed up.
FRENCH   Tous n\'étaient plus que des rouages, se trouvaient emportés par le branle de la machine, abdiquant leur personnalité, additionnant simplement leurs forces, dans ce total banal et puissant de phalanstère.
FRENCH   Et j\'avais découvert une situation superbe, près de l\'Opéra...
ENGLISH   \"I am having a bodice made like it, with some satin----\"  \"For my part,\" interrupted Madame Bourdelais, \"I was bent on buying some velvet.
FRENCH   Il avait appris déjà le renvoi, il lui promit de retrouver l\'entrepreneuse de cravates.
FRENCH   Je n\'ai pas besoin de savoir.
ENGLISH   \'Tis true she spoke of an English cheviot marked up opposite ten sous cheaper than ours, and the same stuff, it appears.\"  \"Fancy,\" murmured Madame Baudu in her weak voice, \"we knew that house when it was scarcely larger than a handkerchief! Yes, my dear Denise, when the Deleuzes started it, it had only one window in the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin; and such a tiny one, there was barely room for a couple of pieces of print and two or three pieces of calico.
FRENCH   Une rage d\'homme dépouillé, mangé par les autres, s\'aigrissait sous la correction aimable de ses manières.
ENGLISH    \"Do you think so?\" murmured Madame Guibal.
ENGLISH   It seemed as if the god of finery had here set up his white tabernacle.
FRENCH   Hein? vous voulez qu\'on change ce paletot? Mais tout de suite...
ENGLISH   And the crowd seemed to be black, like skaters on a Polish lake in December.
FRENCH   Depuis une demi-heure, elle était là, sans un geste, sans un mot; ces dames et le baron l\'avaient dévisagée au passage; maintenant, les voix du salon lui arrivaient par bouffées légères, tout ce luxe aimable la souffletait de son indifférence; et elle ne bougeait toujours pas.
FRENCH    -- Mon oncle, ne l\'excusez pas, je vous en prie...
ENGLISH   Bile had now given his yellow face a greenish hue, and his eyes were bloodshot.
ENGLISH   People were beginning to leave; pillaged stuffs encumbered all the counters, and gold was chinking in the tills whilst the customers went off, their purses emptied, and their heads turned by the wealth of luxury amidst which they had been wandering all day.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! chacun son goût, disait Mme de Boves, en acceptant elle aussi un sandwich.
FRENCH   Un chien fini, mauvais comme la gale, et qui croit encore parler à ses troupiers!  En effet, le père Jouve était détesté de tous les vendeurs, pour la sévérité de sa surveillance.
FRENCH    C\'était une femme de quarante-cinq ans, qui débarquait de loin en loin à Paris, du fond d\'un département perdu.
FRENCH   La petite maison de Bourras, serrée entre le Bonheur des Dames et l\'Hôtel Duvillard, accrochée là comme un nid d\'hirondelle dans la fente d\'un mur, semblait devoir être écrasée du coup, le jour où le magasin envahirait l\'hôtel, et ce jour était venu, le colosse tournait le faible obstacle, le ceignait de son entassement de marchandises, menaçait de l\'engloutir, de l\'absorber par la seule force de son aspiration géante.
FRENCH    -- Oui, tout doit y être, répondit ce dernier.
FRENCH   Et c\'était sur ce chantier enfiévré de travail, au milieu des artistes achevant la réalisation de son rêve, commencée par les maçons, que Mouret venait de sentir plus amèrement que jamais la vanité de sa fortune.
FRENCH   Ta mère et tes soeurs se portent bien, j\'espère? Et n\'as-tu pas dû te marier à Plassans, il y a six mois?  Un mouvement brusque de Vallagnosc l\'arrêta; et, comme celui-ci avait fouillé le salon d\'un regard inquiet, il se tourna à son tour, il remarqua que Mlle de Boves ne les quittait pas des yeux.
ENGLISH   It seemed as if this colossal orgie of white was also burning, itself becoming so much light.
FRENCH   Cette fois, elle avait avec elle un petit garçon de quatre ou cinq ans.
ENGLISH   In making the tour of the departments he had found them empty, and the possibility of defeat had suddenly presented itself before him amidst all his obstinate faith in fortune.
FRENCH   Ce jeune homme est de mon pays...
FRENCH   La boutique restait noire et vide.
ENGLISH   When he had thanked Madame Desforges for having spoken for him at the Ministry, he cast at Mouret the timid glance of a man encountering the evil that is to kill him.
ENGLISH    \"What a stranger you are becoming! I say the same for you, Monsieur de Vallagnosc.\"  Her great grief was that she was getting stout, and she now squeezed herself into the tightest fitting black silk dresses, in order to conceal her increasing corpulency.
ENGLISH    \"By the way,\" asked Henriette, who wished to appear entirely at her ease, \"what have you done with my protégée, Monsieur Mouret? You know--Mademoiselle de Fontenailles.\" And, turning towards Madame Marty, she explained, \"A marchioness, my dear, a poor girl fallen into poverty.\"  \"Oh,\" said Mouret, \"she earns three francs a day by stitching pattern-books, and I fancy I shall be able to marry her to one of my messengers.\"  \"Oh! fie! what a horror!\" exclaimed Madame de Boves.
ENGLISH   At last it was Geneviève who resumed: \"Come, don\'t stay any longer, you have your own affairs to look after.
ENGLISH   Favier contented himself with saying: \"If it had caught me, you would have seen some sport!\"  Then the affair wound up in jeers.
FRENCH    Mais Pauline se récria.
ENGLISH   \"In burying that poor girl they\'re burying the whole district.
ENGLISH   For a long time past Mouret had cherished a desire to realize his former project, the invasion of the whole block of building from the Rue Monsigny to the Rue de la Michodière and from the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin to the Rue du Dix-Décembre, by The Ladies\' Paradise.
ENGLISH   But Geneviève, stretching out her arms caught hold of her and kept her in a desperate embrace.
ENGLISH   The employees watching them as they passed, smiled at those two big fellows following in the footsteps of that grave slim girl; Jean frightened in spite of his beard, Pépé bewildered in his tunic, and all three of the same fair complexion, a fairness which made a whisper run from one end of the counters to the other: \"They are her brothers! They are her brothers!\"  But, whilst Denise was looking for a salesman, there occurred another meeting.
FRENCH    Elle lui saisit les mains, elle l\'embrassa, emportée par son bon coeur.
FRENCH   C\'était, chez lui, un sentiment confus, un mélange de sympathie et de colère.
FRENCH   Elle ne parut pas surprise, elle s\'avançait pour la cacher d\'un mouvement instinctif, lorsque Jouve, brusquement, se dressa entre elles.
ENGLISH    \"I love him!\" she murmured, burying her head in the pillow.
ENGLISH    Round the iron columns climbed \"puffings\" of white muslin, secured now and again with white silk handkerchiefs.
ENGLISH   And all her past life came back to her, unfolding itself in the blinding light from the window: the hardships of her start, that sweet walk under the dark foliage of the Tuileries Gardens, and, lastly, the desires with which he had enveloped her ever since her return.
ENGLISH   Her head was full of a fearful buzzing, she thought of her box on seeing a commissionaire; but where could she have it sent and why all this trouble, when but an hour ago she had still had a bed in which to sleep that night?  Then with her eyes fixed on the houses, she began examining the windows.
ENGLISH    \"I beg your pardon, it\'s my turn,\" said Denise, indignantly.
FRENCH   Mais vous tenez tout, maintenant.
ENGLISH    \"Well, I\'ll go up, aunt,\" said Denise, whose heart ached amidst the resigned despair that even the pieces of cloth themselves exhaled.
FRENCH   Mouret a plaisanté.
FRENCH   Depuis quelques semaines, Jean était grave, comme tourmenté d\'une préoccupation.
FRENCH   La femme supportait la maîtresse, préférant encore que la chose eût lieu chez elle, car elle y gagnait un peu d\'argent de poche, des sommes que le mari se laissait voler, ayant lui-même besoin de tolérance.
FRENCH   Toute une armée de décorateurs se mettaient à l\'oeuvre: des marbriers, des faïenciers, des mosaïstes; on dorait le groupe central, au-dessus de la porte, tandis que, sur l\'acrotère, on scellait déjà les piédestaux qui devaient recevoir les statues des villes manufacturières de la France.
ENGLISH   She fell back on the bed, weeping at the thought of the two children, and she wept on and on, without even the strength to take off her boots, so completely was she overcome with fatigue and grief.
ENGLISH   Madame Aurélie alone remained there immutable, in the curved cuirass of her silk dress and with her imperial face retaining the yellowish puffiness of an antique marble.
ENGLISH   Her room was her only refuge, the only spot where she could indulge in the luxury of a cry, when she had suffered too much during the day.
FRENCH   Des volées de cloche, à une heure d\'intervalle, avaient déjà sonné les deux premières tables du soir; la troisième allait être servie, et dans les rayons, peu à peu déserts, il ne restait que des clientes attardées, à qui leur rage de dépense faisait oublier l\'heure.
FRENCH   C\'était une cravate en blonde espagnole de trente francs; elle n\'en voulait pas, mais le commis lui avait juré qu\'elle tenait la dernière et qu\'on allait les augmenter.
FRENCH   Des piles d\'assiettes de rechange se dressaient à chaque extrémité; tandis que, au milieu, s\'allongeait un gros pain, percé d\'un couteau, le manche en l\'air.
FRENCH   Quant à vous aimer, vous ne pouvez m\'en empêcher, n\'est-ce pas? Je vous aimerai pour rien, comme une bête...
FRENCH   Il ne la croirait pas, il rirait comme les autres; et cette crainte la fit défaillir.
ENGLISH   Waiters in white aprons moreover attended to the young ladies, and spared them the trouble of fetching their portions from the wicket.
FRENCH   Enfin, Mme Aurélie se tourna, l\'air solennel.
ENGLISH   He was himself scared, and trembled at what he had just said.
FRENCH   Quant à ces dames, elles s\'amusaient plus discrètement, d\'un air d\'intelligence mondaine; tandis que, seul, le profil impérial de Mme Aurélie ne riait pas, comme si les beaux cheveux sauvages et les fines épaules virginales de la débutante l\'eussent déshonorée, dans la bonne tenue de son rayon.
FRENCH   Eh bien! on m\'aurait mangée, les premiers jours, si je ne m\'étais pas mise en travers...
FRENCH   Hutin?  Et, lorsque celui-ci fut remonté de la réception, où un vendeur était descendu le chercher, une explication vive s\'engagea.
FRENCH   Toute la vie était là, on avait tout sans sortir, l\'étude, la table, le lit, le vêtement.
FRENCH   Les mains se tendirent, et il demanda tout de suite:  -- Mme de Boves nous a-t-elle fait l\'honneur de venir?  -- Mon Dieu! non, répondit le comte, et à son grand regret.
ENGLISH   The customers laughed, delighted with this duel, quite stirred by the terrible thrusts which the rivals dealt one another in order to please them.
FRENCH   Oui, parfaitement, Pauline Cugnot; et mes parents sont meuniers, là-bas...
ENGLISH   There was no assistant now.
FRENCH   Mais, au dessert, Mme Baudu, qui ne pouvait tenir en place, quitta la boutique pour venir s\'asseoir derrière sa nièce.
FRENCH   Elle fut célèbre, elle occupa un instant tout le marché parisien.
FRENCH    Mais il croyait qu\'elle l\'accusait de se vanter.
ENGLISH   Do they think they can make me commit a knavish trick with their money! They shan\'t have it, by heavens! Never, never, you hear me?\"  Then Denise broke her silence to remark, in her calm, quiet way: \"They\'ll have it in nine years\' time, when your lease expires.\"  And, notwithstanding her uncle\'s presence, she begged the old man to accept.
ENGLISH   Mignot, in particular, was bending his pretty doll-like face forward, and striving to impart tender inflections to his thick Parisian voice.
FRENCH   On a encore plus faim en sortant de table!  Pourtant, il avait mangé deux parts de confiture, la sienne et celle qu\'il avait échangée contre sa portion de riz.
ENGLISH    \"How stupid he is, he\'ll make himself ill,\" resumed the voice.
ENGLISH    \"Have the goodness to follow me, mademoiselle,\" he said in a harsh voice.
ENGLISH   Five or six women in silk dresses, looking very coquettish with their frizzy chignons and crinolines drawn back, were moving about and talking.
FRENCH   On retrouvait le blanc des vitrines du dehors, mais avivé, colossal, brûlant d\'un bout à l\'autre de l\'énorme vaisseau, avec la flambée blanche d\'un incendie en plein feu.
FRENCH   Justement, on entrait dans la morte-saison d\'hiver, et il balaya les rayons, il entassa les victimes, poussant tout à la rue.
ENGLISH   These harsh words, free from anger, upset her far more than a violent scene such as she had feared.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, l\'architecte, qui arrivait avec sa bande de démolisseurs, avait dû requérir le commissaire pour le mettre dehors.
FRENCH   Je suis cerné!  Il agitait ses grands bras, dans une crise de fureur qui hérissait sa crinière blanche.
FRENCH    Denise avait retrouvé son calme brave.
ENGLISH   Her husband, an Inspector-General of the State Studs, had married her for her beauty.
FRENCH   Toutes ces demoiselles lui étaient connues.
FRENCH   La nuit tombait, il la reconnut pourtant.
FRENCH    Elle le regarda fixement, du regard triste et calme dont elle recevait les allusions blessantes de ces demoiselles.
FRENCH    La lingère fut très étonnée.
ENGLISH   Out in the street the tumult was increasing; the people pressed forward as with glistening eyes at a theatre; some girls, fresh from a workshop, were almost pushing through the windows in their eagerness to see what was going on.
FRENCH    -- Tu dis encore une douzaine? demanda Denise à son frère.
FRENCH   La semaine suivante, en effet, Mouret, baissant carrément le Paris-Bonheur de vingt centimes, le donna à cinq francs quarante; il avait eu, avec Bourdoncle et les intéressés, une discussion vive, avant de les convaincre qu\'il fallait accepter la bataille, quitte à perdre sur l\'achat; ces vingt centimes étaient une perte sèche, puisqu\'on vendait déjà au prix coûtant.
ENGLISH   It must have been the governor coming home from a party; and the idea that he was there in the dark possibly waiting for her, caused her one of those strange fears with which he still inspired her, without any reasonable cause.
FRENCH   Puis, elle éprouvait un délabrement du corps entier, les membres et les organes tirés par cette lassitude des jambes, de brusques troubles dans son sexe de femme, que trahissaient les pâles couleurs de sa chair.
ENGLISH   Without saying a word, however, he let them joke away, swallowing large mouthfuls of bread, and picking the neck with the infinite art of a fellow who entertains great respect for meat.
ENGLISH    \"Poor Robineau\'s done for, he looks like a drowning man,\" he resumed.
FRENCH   Dans le hall des soieries, sous la blonde lumière, des dames s\'étaient dégantées, pour palper doucement des pièces de Paris- Bonheur, en causant à demi-voix.
ENGLISH    The pens started off again, the pieces fell; the flood of material still increased, as if the water of a river had emptied itself there.
FRENCH   La queue du cortège se répandait parmi les tombes voisines, tous les visages de ces boutiquiers, appauvris de sang au fond de leurs rez-de-chaussée malsains, prenaient une laideur souffrante, sous le ciel couleur de boue.
FRENCH   Il y en aura une qui vengera les autres, c\'est fatal.
ENGLISH   It rests us a little to be seated.\"  As a fact, Madame de Boves, with scarcely more than her cab-fare in her purse, was having all sorts of laces handed down, simply for the pleasure of seeing and handling them.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s all over now; I should be too miserable if you punished me by withdrawing your friendship.
ENGLISH   The whole staff knew her, was aware that her name was Boutarel, and that she lived at Albi, but troubled no further about her, neither about her position nor her mode of life.
FRENCH    Henriette avait pâli.
FRENCH   Le règne de Denise commençait.
FRENCH   Cette petite, c\'est le quartier qu\'on enterre...
FRENCH   Alors, il se remit à sourire, il la força de s\'avancer, finit par dire qu\'il lui donnerait ce qu\'elle pourrait prendre dans une poignée; et il y avait un marché d\'amour, au fond de sa plaisanterie.
ENGLISH   But on reaching the landing, Henriette no longer found Mouret there, for he had just plunged Vallagnosc into the midst of the crowd in order to complete his bewilderment, he himself, too, feeling the need of a dip into this bath of success.
ENGLISH   Such was always his luck, he might just as well kill himself at once, for he could not even yield to the promptings of his heart without doing some stupid thing.
ENGLISH    The saleswoman did not reply but looked at her, with an air of disdain for her shabby dress; then turning to one of her companions, a short girl with a sickly white skin and an innocent and disgusted expression of countenance, she asked: \"Mademoiselle Vadon, do you know where Madame Aurélie is?\"  The girl, who was arranging some mantles according to their sizes, did not even take the trouble to raise her head.
ENGLISH   In the small cold room they were smiling at each other, greatly affected by this whispered conversation.
FRENCH   Jusqu\'au bout, il lui fallut assister à l\'oeuvre invincible de la vie, qui veut la mort pour continuelle semence.
FRENCH   Même à cette minute, il n\'y avait qu\'elle, et il songeait qu\'il préférait être là pour la protéger, tout en suivant l\'autre avec la peur de quelque scène fâcheuse.
FRENCH   Et vous avez vu le nez de Bourdoncle qui a blanchi tout d\'un coup.
FRENCH   Une honte enfin l\'avait pris, et, laissant les trois femmes vivre mal des débris de leur fortune, il était venu occuper une petite place au ministère de l\'Intérieur, où il se tenait enfoui, comme une taupe dans son trou.
ENGLISH   Denise doubtless felt this indifference and rancour behind her, for she went downstairs with the same troubled feeling that had possessed her on going up, asking herself whether she ought to be sorry or glad at having come.
FRENCH   C\'était la dame morte, celle que le quartier l\'accusait d\'avoir tuée, pour fonder la maison sur le sang de ses membres.
FRENCH   Ah! nous sommes tous jolis, un beau cortège de carcasses que nous faisons à la chère enfant! Ça doit être drôle, pour les gens qui regardent défiler cette queue de faillites...
ENGLISH    \"Well,\" said he, \"it\'s all over.
ENGLISH   They succeed, so much the worse for them! As for me, I protest--that\'s all!\"  The servant brought in a piece of roast veal.
ENGLISH   At last the draper made an effort, and tore himself away from the spectacle of The Paradise and its sales.
ENGLISH   Then she tried to soften him and Jouve, entreating them in the name of their mothers, and speaking of dragging herself at their feet.
FRENCH   Elle le trouvait commun, mais fort aimable, d\'une belle humeur sanguine, qui la surprenait et l\'amusait.
FRENCH    -- J\'ai entendu le mot «cravate», dit Favier.
FRENCH   Il sortait, rentrait de nouveau, posait sur le guéridon le service de Chine, puis des assiettes de sandwiches et de biscuits.
FRENCH   Son amertume contre le Bonheur crevait dans sa gorge.
ENGLISH    \"Ah!\" said Madame Marty, \"you\'re looking at some cravats and handkerchiefs like those I showed you the other day.\"  This was true; Madame de Boves, tormented by Madame Marty\'s lace ever since the previous Saturday, had been unable to resist the desire to at least handle some like it, since the meagre allowance which her husband made her did not permit her to carry any away.
FRENCH    -- N\'est-ce pas? toutes ces filles de boutique ont l\'air de femmes de chambre...
FRENCH   Une maison où l\'on fait des mariages, merci!  Des rires s\'élevèrent.
FRENCH   Lorsqu\'il aperçut Denise, il faillit laisser échapper un geste d\'étonnement.
ENGLISH   More than five thousand drapery employees, dismissed like herself, were wandering about Paris in want of situations.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! vous me donnez une idée, reprenait Mme Desforges.
FRENCH    -- Envoyez-le-moi, dit-elle rapidement, à une caisse voisine.
FRENCH    Une sourde colère le soulevait peu à peu.
FRENCH   Mais de l\'autre côté de la rue, un écriteau jaune l\'arrêta: _Chambre garnie à louer_.
FRENCH   En haut, le vide lui parut navrant: aux dentelles, une vieille dame faisait fouiller tous les cartons, sans rien acheter; tandis que trois vauriennes, à la lingerie, choisissaient longuement des cols à dix-huit sous.
FRENCH   Ses craintes du matin, ce moment d\'impardonnable faiblesse que personne ne connaîtrait jamais, le jetait à un besoin tapageur de triomphe.
ENGLISH   Entire pieces of stuff were consumed; every year they sent away more than sixty thousand francs\' worth of material, cut up in strips.
FRENCH   Quelqu\'un remua au premier, des bottes craquaient.
ENGLISH   Right and left, framed round by wood work of a bottle-green hue, which time had tinted with ochre and bitumen, were two deep windows, black and dusty, in which pieces of cloth heaped one on another could vaguely be seen.
FRENCH   Son nez se tourne vers la lingerie.
ENGLISH   Bourras\'s small house, hemmed in between The Ladies\' Paradise and the Hôtel Duvillard, clinging there like a swallow\'s nest in a crack of a wall, seemed certain to be crushed, as soon as the shop galleries should invade the hôtel.
FRENCH   C\'est insupportable.
FRENCH   C\'était enfin la poussée attendue, l\'écrasement de l\'après-midi, dont il avait un instant désespéré, dans sa fièvre; tous les commis se trouvaient à leur poste, un dernier coup de cloche venait de sonner la fin de la troisième table; la désastreuse matinée, due sans doute à une averse tombée vers neuf heures, pouvait encore être réparée, car le ciel bleu du matin avait repris sa gaieté de victoire.
FRENCH   C\'était toute sa tactique, la griser d\'attentions galantes et trafiquer de ses désirs, exploiter sa fièvre.
ENGLISH   Everything would be properly valued, nothing appeared to him easier to realise.
ENGLISH   Sometimes indeed he even ventured to laugh at her and tease her, without caring to acknowledge to himself the troublous feeling, the charm which this little saleswoman, with such a comical head of hair, inspired in him.
ENGLISH    Every evening she heard the same sounds, the girls coming up one by one, brief whispered conversations, bursts of laughter and sometimes disputes which they stifled as much as possible.
FRENCH   À la porte, des flanelles rouges claquaient au vent ainsi que des drapeaux, un étalage de tapis éclatait en une floraison saignante d\'énormes roses et de pivoines épanouies.
ENGLISH   These vans were green, picked out with yellow and red, their brilliantly varnished panels gleaming with gold and purple in the sunlight.
ENGLISH   It\'s impossible.
FRENCH    -- N\'est-ce pas? laissa-t-elle échapper, dans un cri involontaire de femme amoureuse.
ENGLISH    \"Bah!\" murmured he, \"life isn\'t worth all that trouble.
FRENCH   Épousez-la, et que cela finisse.
ENGLISH   She had seen Mouret again and everything had been settled.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle then told her of her son Albert\'s latest act of carelessness, which seemed to fill her with despair.
FRENCH   Et, maintenant, elle essayait des gants de Saxe, par crainte que la pointure ne fût pas exacte.
ENGLISH    Meantime, the shop was still without customers, that is, except a few housewives of the neighbourhood who were passing through the almost deserted galleries.
ENGLISH   Up above, the profusion of gilding, the glass work and the golden roses seemed like a burst of sunshine, glittering over the Alps of this grand exhibition of white goods.
ENGLISH    \"What is it you want, mademoiselle?\" he asked at last.
FRENCH    Il y eut un silence.
ENGLISH   And between the two windows, there was also a little printing-press for the tickets.
ENGLISH   And from all points came similar conversations amidst an increasing rattle of crockery.
ENGLISH   Glass roofings covered the court-yards turned into huge halls, iron staircases ascended from the ground floor, on both upper floors iron bridges were thrown from one end to the other of the establishment.
FRENCH   Vous savez que je ne suis guère mieux portant que vous.
ENGLISH   Nevertheless she considered that Denise had robbed her of Madame Frédéric\'s place.
FRENCH   Il y eut un silence.
ENGLISH   \"Monsieur Marty is the most gallant of men.\"  The poor professor was obliged to bow and say that his wife was quite free to buy what she liked.
FRENCH   Ça doit être la femme d\'un boursier ou d\'un médecin, enfin je ne sais pas, quelque chose dans ce genre.
ENGLISH   A dockyard kind of bustle filled this basement, whose vaulted roofing was supported by wrought-iron pillars and whose bare walls were simply cemented.
FRENCH   Ils examinèrent le spécimen d\'un petit cahier à souches que Mouret venait d\'inventer pour les notes de débit.
ENGLISH   Then a desire for violence seizing hold of him, he finished by getting into a rage with the salesmen whom the assault of the customers had disbanded.
FRENCH    Puis, il resta debout au bord du trottoir, attendant comme les autres.
FRENCH    -- Est-ce qu\'ils ont un piano comme les toiliers? demanda Liénard.
FRENCH   Elle doit le remiser quelque part.
ENGLISH   The sensations she had experienced during the first few weeks again returned, she fancied herself a grain of seed under a powerful millstone; and utter discouragement came over her at the thought of what a small atom she was in this great machine, which would certainly crush her with its quiet indifference.
ENGLISH    \"Keep your eye on the young man in the lace department,\" he concluded each time.
FRENCH   Denise s\'attardait derrière Pauline et son amant, qui marchaient les bras à la taille; elle avait cueilli une poignée de boutons d\'or, elle regardait l\'eau couler, heureuse, le coeur défaillant, baissant la tête, quand Baugé se penchait pour baiser la nuque de son amie.
FRENCH   Cette fois, il venait d\'apporter un cou de poulet et un débris de carcasse.
ENGLISH   Baudu, his eyes dilated, and his mouth clammy, listened with a visible mental strain.
ENGLISH   That was her sole luxury.
FRENCH   Tiens! qui avait-elle donc perdu, son mari ou son père? Pas son père sans doute, car elle aurait paru plus triste.
ENGLISH   This time the woman had proved the stronger, and he was expecting to be swept away by the disaster.
FRENCH    -- Allons, c\'est la fin, reprit-il.
FRENCH    -- Mademoiselle Prunaire! cria Hutin.
FRENCH   Le malheur est que tout le monde ici ne partage point mon avis...
FRENCH   Déjà tout blanc, alourdi par sa vie sédentaire, il avait une figure molle, effacée, comme usée au reflet de l\'argent qu\'il comptait sans relâche.
ENGLISH   So, after leaving the shop, she sometimes went to fetch Pépé, and instead of going up-stairs at once, took a stroll in the Tuileries Gardens until the gates closed.
FRENCH   Et l\'on en vint aux appointements, aux augmentations, l\'éternel sujet, la question passionnante qui les secouait tous.
FRENCH    Du coup, Mouret intervint une seconde fois.
FRENCH   Elle répondit:  -- Allez donc dire cela à M.
ENGLISH   It was a mere trifle, he had no expenses, and could thus hold out for a long time still.
FRENCH   Ce qui ravissait, c\'était, au milieu, une fontaine d\'argent, une Bergère debout sur une moisson de fleurs, et d\'où coulait un filet continu d\'eau de violette, qui résonnait musicalement dans la vasque de métal.
FRENCH    XIV   La rue du Dix-Décembre, toute neuve, avec ses maisons d\'une blancheur de craie et les derniers échafaudages des quelques bâtisses attardées, s\'allongeait sous un limpide soleil de février; un flot de voitures passait, d\'un large train de conquête, au milieu de cette trouée de lumière qui coupait l\'ombre humide du vieux quartier Saint-Roch; et, entre la rue de la Michodière et la rue de Choiseul, il y avait une émeute, l\'écrasement d\'une foule chauffée par un mois de réclame, les yeux en l\'air, bayant devant la façade monumentale du Bonheur des Dames, dont l\'inauguration avait lieu ce lundi-là, à l\'occasion de la grande exposition de blanc.
FRENCH   Et lui, au milieu de cette ruine, lorsque l\'épouvante du lendemain le prenait, ne tremblait que pour sa femme, élevée dans une paix heureuse, incapable de vivre pauvre.
FRENCH   Une idée, cependant, grandissait au milieu de projets fous, s\'imposait peu à peu, malgré ses révoltes.
ENGLISH   That\'s the reason, isn\'t it? You warned me, I ought to have known it, and not have tormented you any further.\"  She stood there thunderstruck by the violence of this despair.
FRENCH    -- Comme vous y allez, cher monsieur! se contenta de répondre le baron Hartmann.
ENGLISH   But she was so beside herself with bashfulness that she mistook the clearest directions; and the shopmen, of whom in stammering accents she asked for Madame Aurélie, in vain directed her to the staircase conducting to the first floor; she thanked them, but turned to the left if they told her to turn to the right; so that for the last ten minutes she had been wandering about the ground-floor, going from department to department, amidst the ill-natured curiosity and boorish indifference of the salesmen.
ENGLISH   She continued weeping on for some time, but at last found a little courage to live on still.
ENGLISH   Suppose some one else had seen you slip this lace----\"  But she interrupted him in great indignation.
FRENCH   Ce qui l\'enrageait, c\'était qu\'il connaissait bien la cliente, une adorable blonde qui venait souvent au rayon et que les vendeurs appelaient entre eux: «la jolie dame», ne sachant rien d\'elle, pas même son nom.
FRENCH   N\'est-ce pas? Vous me croyez fini, et les dents vous poussent.
ENGLISH   Only the very rich Lyons manufacturers, such as Dumonteil, could accept the big shops\' terms, satisfied to keep their looms going with them, and seeking their profits in their sales to less important establishments.
FRENCH   C\'était ainsi que Denise se trouvait installée près du caissier Lhomme et du garçon Joseph, l\'un et l\'autre penchés sur de grandes feuilles de papier.
FRENCH   Seul un doute, une crainte jalouse devait faire découvrir à la jeune fille qu\'elle s\'était donnée à jamais, au milieu de cette ombre complice, par vide de coeur et ennui de tête.
ENGLISH    \"But what will you do, then?\" she murmured, seeking some transition in order to arrive at the offer which she dared not make.
FRENCH   Elle avait appelé d\'un signe une vendeuse du rayon de la lingerie, une fille à figure large, l\'air agréable.
ENGLISH   They described festoons round the arches of the upper storeys; they descended in garlands down the slender columns; they ran in close lines along the balustrades of the galleries and the staircases; and everywhere ranged symmetrically, speckling the walls with red, green, and yellow, they looked like huge Venetian lanterns, lighted up for some colossal entertainment.
FRENCH   N\'avait-elle pas de honte? une jeune fille comme elle s\'abandonner à un être pareil! et il en vint à des accusations atroces, il lui reprocha Hutin, d\'autres encore, dans un tel flot de paroles, qu\'elle ne pouvait même se défendre.
ENGLISH    \"Madame Aurélie!\" cried Bourdoncle.
FRENCH   On en causa.
ENGLISH   This idea of marriage surprised Denise and she did not dare to advise her friend.
ENGLISH    \"The fat old girl from the country--you know whom I mean,\" murmured Marguerite to Clara.
FRENCH    -- Les bonnetons et les bobinards ont l\'air de battre monnaie, murmura Favier en parlant des vendeurs de la bonneterie et de la mercerie.
ENGLISH   Self-respect above everything, I say.
ENGLISH    \"I shall stay with you,\" said Madame Guibal, whose curiosity was awakened.
ENGLISH   Then Madame Desforges, pushing open a door, entered the dressing-room, with Mouret behind her.
FRENCH   Denise et les deux enfants reprirent leur place, avec Baudu, Geneviève et Colomban.
FRENCH    -- Comment ça? demanda-t-il très pâle.
ENGLISH   However, it sufficed that her husband desired to conquer, and she became as impassioned as he himself, and would have stood to her counter till death.
FRENCH    -- Oh! quant à souffrir, cela n\'est pas dans ma spécialité, dit Mouret, d\'un ton de bravade.
FRENCH   N\'est-ce pas blessant? une marquise! Et il la force à suivre comme un chien les créatures ramassées par lui sur le trottoir!  Elle tâcha de se calmer, elle affecta d\'ajouter d\'un air indifférent:  -- Allons donc à la soie voir leur étalage.
FRENCH   Ce qui les indignait, c\'était, rue de la Michodière, devant le bureau du départ, une des quatre voitures que Mouret venait de lancer dans Paris: des voitures à fond vert, rechampies de jaune et de rouge, et dont les panneaux fortement vernis prenaient au soleil des éclats d\'or et de pourpre.
FRENCH   Sa voisine de gauche rêvait souvent tout haut, ce qui l\'avait effrayée d\'abord.
FRENCH   Mouret lui disait d\'une voix basse, et tremblante:  -- Écoutez, je vous aime...
FRENCH    -- Mais pourquoi?...
FRENCH   Quand il leva la tête, il était dans le nouveau rayon des modes, dont les glaces donnaient sur la rue du Dix-Décembre.
ENGLISH   And, continuing his talk, he formally introduced Colomban, who came from Rambouillet, like Madame Baudu\'s father; in fact they were distant cousins.
FRENCH   Il levait la tête, du mouvement bourru qu\'il affectait sur le seuil de sa boutique, chaque fois qu\'elle passait.
FRENCH   Enfin, voilà tout ce que j\'ai.
FRENCH   Dans l\'étroite boutique, comme il la dévisageait toujours de son air étonné, elle dit son départ du magasin et son désir de ne pas gêner son oncle.
FRENCH   Elle avait la sensation vague de sa puissance, aux flatteries qui l\'entouraient.
FRENCH   Comment la faire taire? comment dire à Denise qu\'il l\'adorait, qu\'elle seule existait à cette heure, qu\'il lui sacrifiait toutes ses anciennes tendresses d\'un jour? Une fille n\'aurait pas eu les familiarités équivoques de cette bourgeoise.
ENGLISH   It\'s a question of temperament, no doubt.\"  \"The Bon Marché is very provincial,\" murmured Madame Marty, \"and one gets so crushed at the Louvre.\"  They had again returned to the big establishments.
ENGLISH   One of these mornings, I shall shut up shop and go off.\"  She was aware that a failure was no longer to be feared.
ENGLISH   When she saw a dress she liked in a shop, she had it sent home, took a pattern of it, and then sent it back.
FRENCH   Moi, je ne partage pas.
FRENCH    -- Vous savez que je vous appartiens, murmura-t-il pour conclure.
ENGLISH   And the morrows were the same days over again, days which were so active, so full of colossal labour but which the slight shadow of a child sufficed to ravage with anguish.
FRENCH    Mouret obéit, et les tempes bourdonnantes, ne sachant comment cacher son angoisse, il rappela Mme Aurélie, s\'emporta contre le stock des rotondes, dit qu\'il faudrait baisser les prix, et les baisser tant qu\'il en resterait une.
FRENCH   Était-ce possible? un jour pareil, avec cette chétive créature! Et, lorsque la porte se rouvrit enfin, Bourdoncle parla des soies de fantaisie, dont le stock allait être énorme.
ENGLISH   However, he could settle it by saying a few words of farewell.
FRENCH   Ce commerce était basé maintenant sur le renouvellement continu et rapide du capital, qu\'il s\'agissait de faire passer en marchandises le plus de fois possible, dans la même année.
FRENCH   Son luxe était là.
FRENCH   Il osa montrer sa répugnance, en disant:  -- Si nous la donnons à cinq francs soixante, c\'est comme si nous la donnions à perte, puisqu\'il faudra prélever nos frais qui sont considérables...
ENGLISH   The workmen even attacked the roofing over his head.
ENGLISH   She had formally prohibited him from coming to the shop in this way, as it looked so bad.
FRENCH    Henriette, pleine de stupeur, étranglée de colère, les regardait.
FRENCH    -- Oui, on finit toujours par là, déclara Colomban, qui n\'avait pas encore lâché une parole, mâchant avec lenteur.
ENGLISH   And he suddenly cried out that they would \"have to alter all that.\" They had forty-eight hours before them, and half of what had been done had to be changed.
FRENCH   Il entrait en passant dire un petit bonjour à son successeur.
ENGLISH   The capital can be turned over as many as fifteen times, I predicted as much long ago.
ENGLISH    \"They don\'t leave us a single good hand,\" said he.
FRENCH    Ces demoiselles allèrent le voir.
FRENCH    -- Quoi donc, monsieur Jouve? demanda-t-elle rassurée.
ENGLISH   At the rear a large scarf of Bruges lace, of considerable value, was spread out like an altar-veil, with its two creamy wings extended; then there were flounces of Alençon, grouped in garlands; and from the top to the bottom, like falling snow, fluttered lace of every description--Malines, Valenciennes, Brussels, and Venetian-point.
FRENCH    Mme de Boves ne répondait pas.
FRENCH   Mon brave Lhomme, mettez ça là, reposez-vous, car vous n\'en pouvez plus.
FRENCH   Oh! les pieds seulement.
FRENCH   Ce n\'était rien encore d\'être humiliée ainsi, mais de le voir presque aux bras d\'une autre, comme si elle n\'eût pas été là!  Henriette s\'examinait devant la glace.
ENGLISH   One by one, the departments had become silent.
ENGLISH   But a great many people sat there doing nothing: these were husbands waiting for their wives, who were roaming through the various departments, young women on the watch for their lovers, and old relations left there as in a cloak-room, to be taken away when it was time to leave.
ENGLISH   Yes, the narrow ribbed serge, the one at two francs.\" And when Liénard had measured it, pale with suppressed anger, she added: \"Have the goodness to take that to pay-desk No.
FRENCH    C\'était vrai, Mme de Boves, que les dentelles de Mme Marty tourmentaient depuis le samedi, n\'avait pu résister au besoin de se frotter du moins aux mêmes modèles, puisque la gêne où son mari la laissait ne lui permettait pas de les emporter.
ENGLISH   The procession of buyers had closed up; and now nearly all of them wore hats or bonnets, it was only here and there that you espied the white caps of a few belated housewives.
ENGLISH   All his maniacal anger was directed against the scoundrels who dishonoured his trade by selling cheap trashy articles, which dogs, said he, would not consent to use.
ENGLISH   Hot tears of disappointment fell from her eyes.
FRENCH    Mais ce qui troubla le plus Denise, ce fut de surprendre le secret de Colomban.
ENGLISH   For two years this correspondence had been increasing daily.
FRENCH   On entendit encore, derrière la porte close, le ronflement adouci de l\'inventaire.
ENGLISH   He had desired that Pépé should come down into the shop to play, for he was wonderfully fond of children.
FRENCH   Le magasin en était tout illuminé.
ENGLISH   She was holding her shoes, turning them about and wondering how she could make them last another month.
ENGLISH   No, no! A house where they insist on their employees marrying, that won\'t do for me!\"  The other fellows began to laugh, and Liénard who was one of Hutin\'s crew added some jocular remark about the Louvre establishment at which Pauline herself burst into a merry peal.
FRENCH   Au contraire, je suis venue rendre.
ENGLISH   All the shopmen were at their posts, a last ring of the bell had announced the end of the third lunch; the disasters of the morning, due no doubt to a shower which had fallen about nine o\'clock, could still be repaired, for the blue sky of daybreak had come back with its victorious gaiety.
ENGLISH   The only person for whom she still showed an invincible repugnance was Clara, for she had learned that this girl had amused herself by leading Colomban astray, even as she had said she would do, for a joke; and he, carried away by his passion, was now becoming more dissipated every day, whilst poor Geneviève was slowly dying.
FRENCH    -- Mademoiselle Prunaire, vous feriez mieux de vous occuper de cette dame que de causer.
FRENCH   Sa cousine voulut l\'empêcher de boire.
FRENCH    -- Et le fiacre? demanda Pauline.
FRENCH   Les mains s\'enfonçaient parmi les pièces débordantes, et elles en gardaient un tremblement d\'ivresse.
FRENCH   D\'un regard désespéré, il suivait Denise, et quand elle eut passé la porte, il n\'y eut plus rien, la maison devint noire.
FRENCH   Elle était sans âge, ses trente-cinq ans en valaient quarante ou trente, selon la fièvre nerveuse qui l\'animait.
ENGLISH    Other fears kept her awake.
FRENCH   Le vieillard finit par aller chercher une clef sur une planche de l\'arrière-boutique, une pièce obscure, où il faisait sa cuisine et où il couchait; au- delà, derrière un vitrage poussiéreux, on apercevait le jour verdâtre d\'une cour intérieure, large de deux mètres à peine.
FRENCH   Ça ne fait rien, il dit oui, je dis non, et je dirai non toujours; tonnerre de Dieu! même lorsque je serai cloué entre quatre planches, comme la petite qui s\'en va, là-bas.
FRENCH    -- Pourquoi aurais-je peur? demanda Denise.
ENGLISH   As was the custom every evening, Lhomme, the chief sales\' cashier, had just collected the receipts from each pay-desk; and after adding them up, he wrote the total amount on a paper which he displayed by hanging it on the iron claw with which the stump of his mutilated arm, severed at the elbow, was provided.
ENGLISH    When the waiter brought in the baked rice, the other young ladies protested.
ENGLISH    But a low whistle stopped their talk; Mouret and Bourdoncle were in the corridor.
ENGLISH   Denise\'s left hand neighbour often talked in her sleep, which at first frightened her very much.
FRENCH   Il me restera à peine de quoi acheter des bottines dont j\'ai grand besoin...
ENGLISH   \"Is it my fault if that little jade in the mantle department is turning his head? My dear follow, you can see that the blow comes from there.
FRENCH   Oh! une querelle dont il se remettait à peine, car il avait quitté la salle hors de lui.
ENGLISH   \"I\'m tired of having mine mended.\"  For several minutes, Madame Marty, very much excited by the conversation, had been feverishly turning her red leather bag about on her lap, for she had not yet been able to show her purchases.
FRENCH    -- Rien, merci...
FRENCH   Le petit dormait.
ENGLISH   And if woman reigned in their shops like a queen, cajoled, flattered and overwhelmed with attentions, she was one on whom her subjects traffic, and who pays for each fresh caprice, with a drop of her blood.
FRENCH   Puis, en haut, elle s\'assit, les mains tremblantes.
FRENCH   Comme le jeune homme voulait lui faire dire que l\'erreur venait de la cliente, il balbutiait, il tordait la barbiche qui allongeait son visage couturé, combattu entre sa conscience d\'ancien soldat et sa gratitude pour ses protecteurs.
FRENCH   Favier se contenta de dire:  -- S\'il m\'avait attrapé, vous auriez vu quelle danse!  Puis, cela finit par des moqueries.
FRENCH    -- C\'est là, reprit Jean.
FRENCH   Tous deux retournaient dans la galerie, lorsque Mme de Boves sortit de chez Bourdoncle.
ENGLISH    Pauline was astonished.
ENGLISH   There are twenty-six yards--a franc the yard.
FRENCH   Après leur sortie du magasin, ils vivaient surtout au Café Saint-Roch.
ENGLISH   Even the toilettes could no longer be distinctly seen, the head-gear alone appeared, decked with feathers and ribbons, while a few men\'s hats here and there showed like black spots, and the woman\'s complexions, pale with fatigue and heat, assumed the transparency of camelias.
ENGLISH   She, little by little had grown and become redoubtable.
FRENCH   On s\'y disputait un savon, le savon Bonheur, la spécialité de la maison.
ENGLISH    He looked at her, becoming serious all at once.
ENGLISH    \"That will do!\" said she, sharply; \"You are not more reasonable than the others, Madame Frédéric.
FRENCH   Comme Denise semblait avoir assez des oeufs, de la friture et du poulet sauté, elle se retint, elle n\'osa commander des fraises, une primeur encore chère, de crainte de trop augmenter l\'addition.
ENGLISH    Thereupon Mouret approached her and said in a lower voice: \"Have the goodness to come to my office this evening after business.
FRENCH   Il ne pouvait amener une cliente au rayon, sans qu\'elle demeurât confuse.
FRENCH    -- Non, non, répétait-elle, avec l\'entêtement d\'une bourgeoise qui se piquait de s\'y connaître.
FRENCH   Puis, malgré sa passion de l\'activité, qui lui faisait ouvrir sa bourse à tous les garçons d\'intelligence et de courage, le coup de génie commercial de Mouret l\'étonnait plus qu\'il ne le séduisait.
FRENCH    Elle tâchait de retenir ses larmes, mais elle ne le pouvait pas.
FRENCH   Du reste, pourquoi étalez-vous tant de marchandises? C\'est bien fait, si l\'on vous vole.
ENGLISH   Since the evening at Joinville, he had harboured a submissive love, an almost religious friendship for her, which he proved by his faithful doglike looks.
FRENCH    Mais elle s\'interrompit, elle eut une exclamation d\'extase.
FRENCH   À pleines mains, Denise lui prit les cheveux, ces cheveux superbes qui semblaient boire sa vie; puis, elle les noua fortement, pour la dégager et lui donner un peu d\'air.
FRENCH   Est-ce que je n\'aurais pas dû les marier tout de suite, sans céder à mon bête d\'orgueil, à mon entêtement de ne point leur laisser la maison moins prospère? Maintenant, elle aurait celui qu\'elle aime, et peut-être leur jeunesse à tous deux accomplirait-elle ici le miracle que je n\'ai pas su réaliser...
FRENCH    -- Prends garde, il y a du monde! dit-elle tout bas, en désignant d\'un signe la porte du grand salon.
FRENCH   Était-ce humain, était-ce juste, cette consommation effroyable de chair que les grands magasins faisaient chaque année? Et elle plaidait la cause des rouages de la machine, non par des raisons sentimentales, mais par des arguments tirés de l\'intérêt même des patrons.
FRENCH   Vous le trouverez cet après-midi, si vous avez à lui parler.
ENGLISH    Moreover the curiosity around The Ladies\' Paradise was increased by a catastrophe of which all Paris was talking, the burning down of The Four Seasons, the big establishment which Bouthemont had opened near the Opera-house, hardly three weeks before.
ENGLISH   The shawl, the fur, and the under-clothing departments literally swarmed with customers; and as the ladies crossed the lace gallery another meeting took place.
FRENCH   Depuis un mois, l\'attitude de Bourdoncle s\'était du reste complètement modifiée: il pliait devant Denise, il poussait même sourdement le patron au mariage.
FRENCH   La maison, enduite d\'un ancien badigeon rouillé, toute plate au milieu des grands hôtels Louis XIV qui l\'avoisinaient, n\'avait que trois fenêtres de façade; et ces fenêtres, carrées, sans persiennes, étaient simplement garnies d\'une rampe de fer, deux barres en croix.
FRENCH    Mais il sentit que sa voix mollissait, il l\'attaqua plus rudement, en lui mettant sous les yeux les gants brodés; et elle fut sans force, elle en acheta une paire.
FRENCH   Dans la nudité du salon, dont les housses blanches semblaient augmenter le vide, montaient les bruits de la rue, la mélopée lointaine d\'une marchande criant des pois verts.
FRENCH   Il chuchota une demande de vingt francs; déjà, il lui en devait trente, un emprunt pratiqué un lendemain de courses, après avoir perdu sa semaine sur un cheval; cette fois, il avait mangé à l\'avance sa guelte touchée la veille, il ne lui restait pas dix sous pour son dimanche.
FRENCH   Marguerite, la meilleure vendeuse après Denise, s\'était fait quatre mille cinq cents francs, quinze cents francs d\'appointements fixes et trois mille francs environ de tant pour cent; tandis que Clara n\'arrivait pas à deux mille cinq cents, en tout.
ENGLISH   Come with us on Sunday, Baugé is going to take me to Joinville.\"  \"No, thanks,\" said the girl with her quiet obstinacy.
FRENCH   Le dernier mois, elle évitait même de sortir, pour ne pas les crever d\'un coup.
ENGLISH   He muttered, \"They\'d precious soon pitch us out.
ENGLISH   Deloche, however, remained behind to escape the malicious remarks that were still being made.
FRENCH    Henriette eut un geste de dédaigneuse insouciance.
ENGLISH    Denise had gained an unexpected victory: she had at last conquered the department.
FRENCH   Il travaille pour occuper ses métiers, car tout métier qui chôme est un métier qui meurt...
FRENCH    -- Mais, sans doute, madame, répondit Mouret d\'une voix de flûte, une voix d\'acteur qu\'il prenait, quand il parlait aux femmes.
ENGLISH   The ordinary salesmen in my place make from three to four thousand francs a year, more than you can earn yourself; and their education did not cost anything like what yours did, nor were they launched into the world with a written promise to conquer it.
FRENCH    Lentement, tous deux traversèrent le sous-sol.
FRENCH   Le six trois quarts serait trop grand pour une main comme la vôtre.
ENGLISH   I _have_ received a letter, and it is my duty to answer it.\"  Deloche went off heart-broken, in the belief that the girl accepted the situation and would keep the appointment that evening.
FRENCH   Quelques hommes, renversés au fond de leurs fauteuils, lisaient des journaux.
ENGLISH   She threw over Mouret himself, and her amiability daily increased for the young person who might some fine morning desire her situation as first-hand.
ENGLISH   Besides, you love another; yes, that lady who comes here.
ENGLISH   And if she comes, you know, why there----\"  So saying he raised his penholder, brandishing it and pointing it in the air, as if he were bent on stabbing some invisible heart with a knife.
FRENCH    -- Enfin, mademoiselle, reprit-il en mettant de nouveau le bureau entre elle et lui, tâchez de veiller sur votre tenue.
ENGLISH   Then there was the flock, the crowd of the girls going off in the evening, nine out of every ten having young men waiting for them at the door.
FRENCH   Sa femme mangeait tout...
ENGLISH   For a long time the others joked over her unfortunate first appearance; and such nicknames as \"clogs\" and \"numbskull\" were bestowed on her.
FRENCH   Et laissez-le...
FRENCH   Oui, vous y laisserez de votre chair, mon ami.
ENGLISH   He likewise stammered his thanks, disturbed in the presence of Denise, whom he now treated as an important person of a superior class.
ENGLISH   There was a crowd among the haberdashery, and even the linen and woollen departments were invaded.
FRENCH    Il haussait la voix, il se soulageait.
ENGLISH   He pretended to be desirous of gaining information, and put several questions: Where did they come from in general? Was their conduct as bad as it was said to be? Quite a discussion ensued.
FRENCH    Mais, presque aussitôt, on oublia Denise.
ENGLISH    However, she had previously not dared to venture into the silk hall whose high glass roof, luxurious counters, and cathedral-like aspect frightened her.
FRENCH   On en tombait d\'accord; chaque année, les employés de commerce prenaient un meilleur genre.
ENGLISH   They felt the \"hung\" goods at the entrance; calico at seven sous the mètre, wool and cotton grey stuff at nine sous, and, above all, some Orleans at seven sous and a half, which was fast emptying the poorer purses.
FRENCH   Ces messieurs prenaient des assiettes propres aux piles qui se dressaient sur la table, de distance en distance: tandis que les garçons promenaient le dessert, des pêches dans des corbeilles.
FRENCH   Et vous, essuyez vos yeux.
ENGLISH   When she saw the young man her hands slightly trembled.
ENGLISH    \"What is the number of the pay-desk that debited the order?\" asked Mouret: \"No.
FRENCH   Et voilà que, maintenant, d\'autres ruines allaient s\'ajouter à ces ruines prévues depuis longtemps: le rayon d\'articles de Paris menaçait un bimbelotier de la rue Saint-Roch, Deslignières, un gros homme sanguin; tandis que le rayon des meubles atteignait les Piot et Rivoire, dont les magasins dormaient dans l\'ombre du passage Sainte-Anne.
FRENCH   M.
FRENCH    La chaleur avait grandi, les bougies coulaient sur les nappes tachées de vin; et, par les fenêtres ouvertes, lorsque le bruit des dîneurs tombait brusquement, entrait une voix lointaine, prolongée, la voix de la rivière et des grands peupliers, qui s\'endormaient dans la nuit calme.
ENGLISH   Baugé paid; but Denise had previously declared that she wished to defray her share of the expenses; they would settle up in the evening.
FRENCH   Son paletot boutonné cachait son habit et sa cravate blanche.
ENGLISH   All his fibs succeeded with her, she believed in all his extraordinary love adventures, her complete ignorance of such things making her exaggerate his dangers.
FRENCH   Il marchait vite, il la forçait à courir, comme emporté par ses réflexions.
ENGLISH   And, in presence of the Robineaus, the joy he felt at having saddled them with an unremunerative business, which he had despaired of getting rid of, made his face with its round eyes and large loyal-looking mouth, a face beaming with health, expand as it had never done before.
FRENCH   Les garçons de magasin, avec leur habit vert dont les larges boutons de cuivre luisaient, attendaient le monde, les mains ballantes.
ENGLISH   \"Don\'t you understand?\" he resumed, \"In a week\'s time from to-day I want the Paris Delight to effect a revolution in the market.
FRENCH   La vérité était qu\'elle redoutait le jeune homme, le grand ami de son fils Albert, le complice de farces louches qu\'elle tremblait de voir mal finir un jour.
ENGLISH   \"Don\'t tell falsehoods, I beg of you.
FRENCH    -- M.
FRENCH   Dans les cases s\'étageaient de grosses pièces, que les vendeurs descendaient, une à une, d\'un brusque effort des bras.
ENGLISH   It\'s exactly what you require.\"  Impressed by such an assurance, the ladies said no more.
ENGLISH   She wouldn\'t have let them ruin us like this.
ENGLISH   Madame Aurélie\'s sudden affection had greatly assisted her in this ungrateful task of propitiating her companions.
FRENCH   Il y eut un silence, les deux hommes restaient face à face, avec leur air profond.
ENGLISH   \"Reckon on me, I\'m with you.
ENGLISH       CHAPTER IV.
ENGLISH   Good heavens! I\'m not at all well, I\'m not at all well.\"  However, the attack passed away, and she sat there completely exhausted and looking fixedly at her cousin.
ENGLISH   The whole table began to joke.
FRENCH    -- La grosse de province, vous savez, murmura Marguerite.
ENGLISH   And it was beside this new building full of the fever of work, amidst the artists putting the finishing touches to the realization of his dream as commenced by the masons, that Mouret more bitterly than ever realized the vanity of his fortune.
ENGLISH   And the stables, royal buildings situated in the Rue Monsigny, opposite the warehouses, accommodated one hundred and forty-five horses, a splendid set of animals already celebrated.
FRENCH   L\'intéressé renvoya les vendeuses.
ENGLISH   A warm sun was playing on the windows, and in spite of the grey linen blinds, the heat penetrated the stagnant air.
FRENCH   Battu là-bas, battu à Paris, battu partout.
FRENCH   de Boves, l\'écoutait d\'un air souriant.
FRENCH   Paul, sur une question discrète, répondit que rien n\'était fait encore; peut-être même rien ne se ferait.
ENGLISH    \"I\'ll go with you as well,\" exclaimed Madame Marty, \"I wanted to see a costume for Valentine.\"  Marguerite thereupon took the chair by its back, and dragged it along on its hind legs, which were getting rather worn by this species of locomotion.
FRENCH   Il reposa son verre gauchement, il se mit à sucer les feuilles d\'artichaut qu\'il avait mangées déjà.
ENGLISH   Really, it would be a fine thing to offer charity to those whom they assassinate!\"  Then she implored him: \"Pray accept, Monsieur Bourras; don\'t cause me this grief.\"  But he shook his bushy head.
ENGLISH   Besides, what man would have cared to take her--a girl without a sou, no fatter than a lath, and not at all pretty? No, no, she would never marry, she had quite enough children with her two brothers.
FRENCH   Marty allait venir lui-même connaître son sort et apporter ses remerciements.
FRENCH   Ensuite, eh bien! ensuite, nous trouverons un truc pour le faire passer davantage.
ENGLISH   However, the authorities showed themselves pitiless at the least complaint from customers; no excuse was admitted, the employee was always wrong, and had to disappear like a defective instrument, which interfered with the proper working of the business; and the others bowed their heads, not even attempting any defence.
ENGLISH   There were many women in mourning, with flowing veils; and there were always some wet nurses straying about and protecting their infantile charges with their outstretched arms.
FRENCH   Toujours son frère! c\'était bête à la fin! Alors, Denise les regarda tous: Bourdoncle, qui dès la première heure ne voulait pas d\'elle; Jouve, resté là pour témoigner, et dont elle n\'attendait aucune justice; puis, ces filles qu\'elle n\'avait pu toucher par neuf mois de courage souriant, ces filles heureuses enfin de la pousser dehors.
FRENCH   On vient toujours chez moi acheter les articles d\'homme, les velours de chasse, les livrées; sans parler des flanelles et des molletons, dont je le défie bien d\'avoir un assortiment aussi complet...
ENGLISH   The ceiling was covered with a quantity of Smyrna carpets, whose intricate designs stood out boldly on red grounds.
FRENCH   Il s\'approchait trop, il lui parlait dans la figure.
ENGLISH   And he immediately began to joke with Bouthemont, whose father, arriving from his little shop at Montpellier two days previously, had almost choked with stupefaction and rage on seeing the immense hall in which his son reigned.
FRENCH   Sa décision, si rapide, avait pris d\'une minute à l\'autre une telle énergie, qu\'il ne voyait plus qu\'elle d\'utile et de nécessaire dans le monde.
ENGLISH   Let them take everything, and we will go away somewhere, where you won\'t hear any more about them.
FRENCH   Peut-être, au fond de ce coup de passion, aurait-on trouvé aussi le calcul rusé d\'un garçon ravi de renoncer à un mariage désastreux; la maison de draperie se portait aussi mal que sa future, l\'heure était bonne de rompre par une sottise.
ENGLISH   And now, what news? Your mother and sisters are quite well, I hope? And weren\'t you supposed to get married at Plassans, about six months ago?\"  A sudden movement made by Vallagnosc stopped him, and as his friend had glanced into the larger drawing-room with an anxious expression, he also turned round, and noticed that Mademoiselle de Boves was closely watching them.
FRENCH   Elle avait vu la scène, elle parlait bas, en souriant.
ENGLISH   She had been there for the last half-hour, without a sign, without a word.
ENGLISH   Shall we say in the oriental saloon?\"  \"That\'s it, in the oriental saloon--Superb, isn\'t it?\"  Then they separated enraptured, amidst the obstruction which the sale of insertions and small trimmings at low prices was causing.
FRENCH   N\'est-ce pas monstrueux? il a osé créer un rayon de ganterie!...
FRENCH    -- Elles sont drôles, je vais acheter une ombrelle rouge, dit tout à coup Mme Marty, qui piétinait, impatientée de rester là, à ne rien faire.
FRENCH    Deux grosses larmes jaillirent des yeux de Denise.
ENGLISH    \"You are right, sir,\" she said, softly, \"I was wrong to stop and talk, and I beg your pardon for doing so.
ENGLISH   She was still handsome.
FRENCH   Quelle musique!  Sans attendre une réponse, il s\'éloigna, il rejoignit Bourdoncle, en train déjà de faire le tour des rayons.
ENGLISH    \"Hallo!\" said Clara, \"the \'unkempt girl\' has got a follower then.\"  \"He must be hard up for a sweetheart,\" declared Marguerite.
FRENCH   Denise entrait justement, et il s\'inclina dans un salut profond, la tête perdue.
FRENCH   On espérait avoir terminé vers dix heures.
FRENCH   De cette manière, nous pouvons nous contenter d\'un petit bénéfice; comme nos frais généraux s\'élèvent au chiffre énorme de seize pour cent, et que nous ne prélevons guère sur les objets que vingt pour cent de gain, c\'est donc un bénéfice de quatre pour cent au plus; seulement, cela finira par faire des millions, lorsqu\'on opérera sur des quantités de marchandises considérables et sans cesse renouvelées...
FRENCH   On estimerait les apports, rien ne lui paraissait d\'une réalisation plus facile.
ENGLISH   Pauline\'s words returned to her memory and she recalled the stories which were told of old Jouve\'s goings-on.
FRENCH   Elle fit une première halte devant les trousseaux, tentée par des chemises que Pauline lui vendit, et Marguerite se trouva débarrassée de la chaise, ce fut Pauline qui dut la prendre.
FRENCH   Elle les voyait confusément, sans cesse reprise par le branle intérieur qui l\'agitait tout entière.
FRENCH   Il ne comprenait toujours pas le triomphe du Bonheur des Dames, mais il avouait la défaite de l\'ancien commerce.
FRENCH   Pourtant, ce n\'était pas de l\'argent qu\'il demandait, car il avait en sa clientèle une foi de fanatique.
FRENCH   Mais, tout d\'un coup, le domestique entra avec deux lampes, et le charme fut rompu.
ENGLISH   They were indeed getting confused with all the litter on the counters, where stuffs were mingling and slipping down.
ENGLISH    \"You see my ankle\'s better now,\" said Denise, \"I was just going down.\"  \"Well!\" exclaimed the other, \"how zealous you are! I\'d take it easy if I had the chance!\"  They had both sat down on a sofa.
FRENCH   Elle le tenait, le serrait contre sa poitrine de vierge, les yeux perdus au fond des ténèbres.
ENGLISH   Meantime let them send it to your house.
ENGLISH     The next morning, at half-past seven, Denise was outside The Ladies\' Paradise, wishing to call there before taking Jean to his new place, which was a long way off, at the top of the Faubourg du Temple.
FRENCH   Elle tremblait, elle sentait la chute inévitable; mais elle n\'osait plus intervenir.
ENGLISH   Was it possible?--a man of such foresight, who divined the presence of money at no matter what depth! And suddenly, with an extremely eloquent gesture, he pointed to the ladies in the drawing-room and exclaimed: \"Customers?--why look there!\"  The sun was paling and the golden-red flame was now but a yellowish gleam, dying away on the silk of the hangings and the panels of the furniture.
FRENCH   Mais la salle obscure l\'inquiétait; elle la regardait, elle se sentait le coeur serré, elle qui était habituée aux larges pièces, nues et claires, de sa province.
ENGLISH   According to him, his business was a golden one; and albeit in the splendour of robust health he broke off to whine and complain of those infernal pains of his which prevented him from remaining in business and making his fortune.
FRENCH   Elle, peu à peu, grandissait, devenait redoutable.
ENGLISH    However, the hearse had still not arrived, and Denise, greatly affected, stood watching the candles burn, when she was startled by a well-known voice behind her.
FRENCH   Si vous êtes heureuse, je serai heureux...
FRENCH   Chez mon oncle Baudu, là, en face.
ENGLISH   Then, as Madame Aurélie ran up at his call, he took her aside, and they exchanged a few rapid words.
FRENCH    L\'oncle Baudu ne pouvait se remettre.
ENGLISH   It was probably Marguerite, who was accused of prowling about at night to spy upon the others.
ENGLISH   Accordingly when Madame Aurélie saw Denise appointed first-hand of the children\'s costume department, she experienced such delight that she paraded the most affectionate feeling towards her, being indeed really grateful to her for not having taken her own place.
ENGLISH   Denise herself had turned paler still, amidst all these people who were laughing at her.
FRENCH    -- Veillez, monsieur Jouve, répétait Bourdoncle à l\'inspecteur.
ENGLISH   As if to seal his promise he raised the young girl\'s hand to his lips--kissing it with the humble kiss of a slave.
FRENCH   C\'était fini, la mère et la fille disparurent dans la fièvre de dépense qui les emportait.
FRENCH   Aveuglés par le plein jour de la rue, ils battaient des paupières comme au seuil d\'un trou inconnu, tâtant le sol du pied, ayant la peur instinctive de quelque marche traîtresse.
FRENCH   Pardonnez-moi, je vous en supplie.
FRENCH   Vous voyez, je me promène, je ne suis venue qu\'en curieuse.
FRENCH   Dès huit heures, il se tenait debout sous la porte, sa montre à la main; et, à trois minutes de retard, l\'implacable: «Passez à la caisse!» hachait les jeunes gens essoufflés.
ENGLISH   As the coffee came in the gaiety was still further increased by the arrival of Vinçard who called, on his way past, just to see how his successor was getting on.
ENGLISH   An exquisite odour was diffused around and the ladies dipped their handkerchiefs in the scent as they passed.
FRENCH   Lui, venait enfin de la deviner.
ENGLISH   Reduced to silence, she listened to him for some time longer and then went away, her soul full of trouble.
ENGLISH   Thank you very much.\"  Hutin was already rejoining Favier, to whom he coarsely whispered: \"What a bag of bones--eh?\"  Upstairs the young girl suddenly found herself in the midst of the mantle department.
ENGLISH   With the others he had merely had to stoop.
FRENCH   Et ne recommencez pas, si vous tenez à la maison.
FRENCH   Et, comme un escalier du sous-sol s\'ouvrait derrière le rayon des cravates, elle y poussa son frère, elle le fit descendre vivement.
FRENCH   Maintenant, il l\'abandonnait, on ne voyait plus, à l\'étalage, qu\'une débandade pitoyable de parapluies mangés par l\'air et de cannes noires de gaz.
FRENCH   Et elle se rapprocha, attirée de nouveau et comme réchauffée à ce foyer d\'ardente lumière.
FRENCH   Je tâcherai de m\'en tirer tout de même.
FRENCH   Elle ne se débattait plus, elle acceptait cette loi de la lutte; mais son âme de femme s\'emplissait d\'une bonté en pleurs, d\'une tendresse fraternelle, à l\'idée de l\'humanité souffrante.
ENGLISH   The counters were littered with unpacked goods, dresses in pink and blue Eastern cotton for children of from one to five years old; sailor costumes in blue \"zephyr\" with plaited skirts and blouses trimmed with cambric; Louis XV.
FRENCH   Cependant, les gamins ne passaient jamais devant sa porte, sans lui crier quelque vilenie, qu\'il ne semblait même pas entendre.
ENGLISH   They blamed the governor in secret for going too quick; accused him of having enlarged the establishment to a dangerous extent, before making sure of a sufficient increase of custom; above all, they trembled on seeing him put all the available cash into one venture, filling the departments with a pile of goods without leaving a copper in the reserve fund.
FRENCH   Nous retrouverons Mme de Boves au salon de lecture.
FRENCH   Il n\'avait pas besoin d\'apprendre où elle logeait; puis, elle était honteuse de la maison, elle souffrait de ce qu\'il pouvait penser d\'elle, bien qu\'ils ne dussent jamais plus se rencontrer.
FRENCH   Voyons, ce n\'est pas possible?  -- Mais si, répondit la jeune fille.
FRENCH   Est-ce que je vous ai fait de la peine?  -- Non, non, murmura-t-elle.
FRENCH   Après s\'être endormie toute vêtue, les yeux épuisés de larmes, la jeune fille, en se réveillant vers quatre heures, avait eu honte de cette crise de sensibilité nerveuse.
FRENCH   Brusquement, elle demeura stupéfaite, elle était de nouveau devant le Bonheur des Dames; et, pour échapper à cette obsession, elle se jeta dans la rue de la Michodière.
ENGLISH   It was indeed just that; at The Ladies\' Paradise, they found themselves as at a sort of private party, they felt a continual caress of flattery, an overflowing adoration which made the most dignified of them linger there.
ENGLISH   But the worst was that the architect, in order to connect the existing shops with those about to be opened in the Hôtel Duvillard, had conceived the idea of tunnelling a passage under the little house that separated them.
FRENCH    Le soir, comme Denise revenait de dîner, un garçon l\'appela.
ENGLISH    The funeral procession started at a slow pace, splashing through muddy puddles, amid the silence of the omnibuses and cabs which were suddenly pulled up.
FRENCH   Elle l\'oubliait.
ENGLISH    \"Did you hear? some one has slipped down! Ah, if they could only all fall and break their backs!--That, my dear, is a dispute between some ladies.
FRENCH   Maintenant, il se disait plus chic que Liénard, parce que Liénard mangeait simplement l\'argent de son père, tandis que lui mangeait l\'argent gagné, le fruit de son intelligence.
FRENCH   Il vaut mieux savoir par soi-même, n\'est-ce pas?...
ENGLISH   However, she resolved to go down again, later on.
FRENCH   Aujourd\'hui, elles n\'ont plus que l\'idée de monter sur le dos des voisins et de tout manger...
FRENCH   C\'était la fièvre dernière du branle-bas, la machine près de sauter; tandis que, le long des glaces sans tain, autour du magasin fermé, continuaient à passer de rares promeneurs, blêmes de l\'ennui étouffant du dimanche.
ENGLISH    \"That\'s me,\" he replied.
ENGLISH    And, completely overcome, entirely forgetting his position of director lecturing a saleswoman guilty of an infraction of the regulations, he broke into a torrent of violent words.
ENGLISH   He claimed that woman was powerless against advertising, that she was bound to be attracted by uproar.
FRENCH   Par moments, le bruit couvrait les paroles de Mouret, qu\'il accompagnait du vacarme formidable d\'une fortune de roi, gagnée dans les batailles.
FRENCH    -- Nous perdrons quelques centimes sur l\'article, je le veux bien.
FRENCH   Oh! je ne me gêne pas, je parle devant M.
FRENCH    Quand la collation des premières listes fut terminée, elle laissa la jeune fille devant une des tables, plongée dans les additions.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! just look there, Jean,\" said she; and they remained stock still, nestling close to one another, dressed from head to foot in black, the old mourning bought at their father\'s death.
ENGLISH    Denise had turned very red, worried with reference to her shoe; and began to stammer out an explanation.
ENGLISH    And forthwith she drew Baron Hartmann into the recess of a window, and boldly recommended Bouthemont to him, as a fellow who would in his turn revolutionize Paris, by setting up for himself.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle étant sorti, Jouve préféra tout lui conter.
FRENCH   Enfin, elle ne sentait donc plus sur elle l\'air enfermé, les pierres lourdes du Bonheur des Dames! elle avait donc devant elle toute une journée de libre campagne! et c\'était comme une nouvelle santé, une joie infinie, où elle entrait avec des sensations neuves de gamine.
FRENCH    -- Mais, madame, j\'arrive de Valognes.
ENGLISH    \"Are you suffering, cousin?\" she asked.
ENGLISH    \"Go, then!\" he cried at last in a flood of tears.
FRENCH    -- Je serai très bien, déclara la jeune fille.
ENGLISH   One woman cried out with pain in the crush and two little girls were nearly stifled.
ENGLISH       CHAPTER X.
ENGLISH   The latter, followed by her daughter Valentine, had for the last two hours been carried through the place by one of those spending fits whence she always emerged weary and bewildered.
ENGLISH   Surely they would be able to discover some situation for her in the neighbourhood.
ENGLISH   It was really clever.
FRENCH    On entendit s\'élever la voix de Baudu.
FRENCH   Je ne devais pas venir, j\'étais au lit, puis je me suis levée pour prendre l\'air.
ENGLISH   To be abandoned for such a creature as that! To see herself disdained before her! Her pride suffered even more than her affection.
ENGLISH    \"To the left, ladies,\" said Hutin, still attentive despite his increasing exasperation.
ENGLISH   So great was her dread, that when she met Baugé in the galleries she often affected not to know him.
ENGLISH   And there was no end to the calling out of the fancy silks.
FRENCH   Mais, quand il en vint à l\'histoire des noeuds de cravate, Bourdoncle s\'emporta.
FRENCH    -- Mais, voyons, toi qui es de la partie, dis-moi s\'il est raisonnable qu\'un simple magasin de nouveautés se mette à vendre de n\'importe quoi.
ENGLISH   For a long time I thought they would smash up; yes, I expected that, waiting patiently--you remember? Well, no, it appears that nowadays thieves make fortunes, whilst honest people die of hunger.
ENGLISH    \"Ah,\" retorted the other, \"she must have cried over them.
FRENCH   On remarqua son humeur joyeuse sur le chantier, le geste victorieux dont il scella la pierre, d\'un coup de truelle.
ENGLISH   But he was especially anxious to vanquish his competitors with his handles of bamboo, dogwood, olive, myrtle, rattan, indeed every imaginable sort of handle.
FRENCH   De cette loi, il tirait toutes sortes d\'applications.
FRENCH    -- Où veux-tu que je trouve quinze francs? s\'écria Denise désespérée.
ENGLISH   Very well, thanks.\"  She tried to find some consoling subject, some cheerful remark, but could think of nothing.
FRENCH    Cependant, Denise avait le triomphe paisible et charmant.
ENGLISH    \"Presently,\" replied Pauline.
FRENCH   On m\'a conté que tu étais dans le commerce.
ENGLISH   Every week the latter would receive their commission, without any possibility of error.
FRENCH   Justement, le long du trottoir, rendu enfin à la circulation, s\'alignaient huit voitures, que des garçons chargeaient l\'une après l\'autre, devant le bureau du départ.
FRENCH   Ce magasin, si vaste pour elle, où elle voyait entrer en une heure plus de monde qu\'il n\'en venait chez Cornaille en six mois, l\'étourdissait et l\'attirait; et il y avait, dans son désir d\'y pénétrer, une peur vague qui achevait de la séduire.
FRENCH    Denise l\'écoutait, saisie, toute pâle.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle contented himself a week later with dismissing, for some slight offence, the girl who had allowed herself to be kissed.
ENGLISH   You must know, I feel it.
FRENCH   Et, maintenant, les deux jeunes gens, la tête au guichet, se communiquaient leurs réflexions, devant cette cuisine de phalanstère, où les moindres ustensiles, jusqu\'aux broches et aux lardoires, devenaient gigantesques.
FRENCH   Elle battait le quartier, tournant sur elle-même, ramenée toujours au seul carrefour qu\'elle connaissait bien.
FRENCH   Enfin, le drapier fit un effort, se détourna pour s\'arracher au spectacle de la vente d\'en face.
ENGLISH   Besides, I shall never have the necessary capital.
ENGLISH   Come to-morrow.\"  In the evening Denise hardly knew how to announce her departure to Bourras.
FRENCH   Un instant encore, Mouret regarda ce travail, toute cette activité autour de ces déballages qui montaient et menaçaient de noyer le sous-sol; puis, sans ajouter un mot, de l\'air d\'un capitaine satisfait de ses troupes, il s\'éloigna, suivi de Bourdoncle.
FRENCH   Est-ce qu\'elle est blonde, la demoiselle de votre histoire?  Le chef de rayon, que son insistance commençait à inquiéter, se contenta de sourire.
FRENCH   Paul avait eu un sourire; il comprenait enfin, il raconta tout bas à Mouret comment le comte, rencontré par lui rue Richelieu, s\'était efforcé de lui échapper et avait pris le parti de l\'entraîner au Bonheur, sous le prétexte qu\'il fallait absolument voir ça.
ENGLISH   The day was for her dark and melancholy.
FRENCH   Il voulut s\'excuser, il balbutia des phrases que Denise ne saisit pas d\'abord.
ENGLISH    \"Come in,\" said both the women in their turn; \"you are welcome.\" And they at once made Denise sit down behind a counter.
FRENCH    Denise comprit que Vinçard poussait son magasin à Robineau, le commis du Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH   C\'est de bon coeur.
ENGLISH   Three waiters were continually engaged in wiping and filling the glasses.
FRENCH   Alors, elle tâcha de se procurer de petits travaux; seulement dans son ignorance de Paris, elle ne savait où frapper, acceptait des besognes ingrates, ne touchait même pas toujours son argent.
FRENCH   Mme Baudu et Geneviève, l\'air résigné, avaient baissé les yeux.
FRENCH   Était-ce donc vrai, cette nécessité de la mort engraissant le monde, cette lutte pour la vie qui faisait pousser les êtres sur le charnier de l\'éternelle destruction? Ensuite, elle se revoyait devant le caveau où l\'on descendait Geneviève, elle apercevait son oncle et sa tante, seuls au fond de leur salle à manger obscure.
FRENCH   Mlle Tatin, la lingère du passage Choiseul, venait d\'être déclarée en faillite; Quinette, le gantier, en avait à peine pour six mois; les fourreurs Vanpouille étaient obligés de sous-louer une partie de leurs magasins; si Bédoré et soeur, les bonnetiers, tenaient toujours, rue Gaillon, ils mangeaient évidemment les rentes amassées jadis.
ENGLISH   But hitherto he had been baulked by the obstinacy of the Crédit Immobilier, which still clung to its first idea of building a rival establishment to the Grand Hôtel on the site in question.
ENGLISH    \"Give Monsieur Mouret the lists,\" said the first-hand.
FRENCH   Tous les jours, il y passait de longues heures, il tentait de s\'intéresser à ces travaux, dont il avait si longtemps rêvé.
ENGLISH   \"When old Hauchecorne left me The Old Elbeuf, the house was prosperous; he himself had received it from old Finet in a satisfactory state.
ENGLISH    \"I caught you again this morning talking upstairs behind the carpet department.
FRENCH   Dès le matin, comme un jour de semaine, tous les employés étaient à leur poste, et la besogne avait commencé, les portes closes, dans les magasins vides de clientes.
FRENCH    -- Pourquoi ne réclamez-vous pas? lui dit Baugé.
FRENCH    Cette main qui se tendait, redoubla le trouble de Denise.
FRENCH   Avec cent sous!  Puis elle ajouta:  -- Voici longtemps que je veux causer.
FRENCH   Après le dîner, elle résolut de remettre au lendemain sa visite chez Mme Gras.
ENGLISH   A regular feast! Chicken, or leg of mutton, and artichokes! Their mutton won\'t be much of a success!\"  Mignot sniggered, murmuring, \"Is there a poultry epidemic on, then?\"  However, Deloche and Liénard had taken their portions and gone away.
FRENCH   Pourquoi donc? qu\'ai-je fait?  Bourdoncle répondit durement qu\'elle le savait, qu\'elle ferait mieux de ne pas provoquer une explication; et il parla des cravates, et il dit que ce serait joli, si toutes ces demoiselles voyaient des hommes dans le sous-sol.
FRENCH   Les coquins créent des rayons de fleurs, de modes, de parfumerie, de cordonnerie, que sais-je encore? Grognet, le parfumeur de la rue de Grammont, peut déménager, et je ne donnerais pas dix francs de la cordonnerie Naud, rue d\'Antin.
ENGLISH   Denise shivered slightly as she went in, chilled by the dampness oozing from the walls.
FRENCH   C\'était là qu\'arrivaient toutes les commandes de la province et de l\'étranger; et, chaque matin, il allait y voir la correspondance.
FRENCH    Il élevait la voix, tapant les doigts de sa main droite sur la paume de sa main gauche, abattant les millions comme il aurait cassé des noisettes.
FRENCH    Des larmes remontaient à ses yeux.
ENGLISH   But this very silence was like a confession of their secret thoughts.
ENGLISH   At the approach of big sale times especially, the slide brought down an endless stream of Lyons silks, English woollens, Flemish linens, Alsatian calicoes, and Rouen prints.
FRENCH   Mais il a fallu que tu le fisses monter.
FRENCH    Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work.
FRENCH   Si je pouvais vous être utile? Vous me demandiez...
FRENCH   Et il restait un moment immobile, il regardait ce dégorgement des marchandises, dont il venait de voir la maison s\'engorger, à l\'extrémité opposée des sous-sols: l\'énorme courant aboutissait là, sortait par là dans la rue, après avoir déposé de l\'or au fond des caisses.
FRENCH   Mouret, toujours debout au milieu de ces dames, avait retrouvé sa bonne grâce: il se défendait gaiement de les ruiner en chiffons, il offrait de démontrer, chiffres en main, qu\'il leur faisait économiser trente pour cent sur leurs achats.
FRENCH   C\'était un dîner de famille, fort simple.
FRENCH    You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
FRENCH   D\'abord, ils se contemplèrent, sans échanger un mot.
ENGLISH    Mouret had opened the door, and Lhomme appeared, followed by the two messengers, who were staggering; and, out of breath though he was, the cashier still had strength to cry out: \"One million two hundred and forty-seven francs, nineteen sous!\"  At last the million had been attained, that million picked up in a day, of which Mouret had so long dreamed.
ENGLISH   And she, such a child--was it possible? When she passed by now, the slight gust from her dress seemed to him so powerful that he staggered.
ENGLISH   She was still slowly trying to walk, resolving, however, to go to bed early, in order to rest her ankle, when Madame Cabin, the housekeeper, knocked and gave her a letter, with an air of mystery.
FRENCH    Il s\'arrêta, étranglé par une émotion qu\'il ne voulait pas montrer.
ENGLISH   It had been left in distress, in the furniture department, beside the work-table, for its weight had become too great, and its hind legs threatened to break off.
ENGLISH   The latter, pending the arrival of a doctor who was not to be found, declared that there was no immediate danger, and that the injured man had better be taken home, as he lived in the neighbourhood.
ENGLISH   She went down, feeling very anxious.
ENGLISH   However, he had already advanced funds to two of Henriette\'s friends, and he was getting tired of his lavishness.
FRENCH   Dans un coin du rayon l\'inspecteur Jouve, qui n\'avait pas lâché Mme de Boves, malgré l\'apparente flânerie de cette dernière, se tenait immobile au milieu des poussées, l\'attitude indifférente, l\'oeil toujours sur elle.
ENGLISH   She had discovered she really was powerless.
FRENCH   Le dos tourna l\'angle de la place Gaillon, et ce fut tout.
FRENCH   Elle savait bien comment arrivaient les choses: c\'était dans une partie semblable que chacune de ces demoiselles avait connu son premier amant, un ami amené comme par hasard; et elle ne voulait pas.
FRENCH   Mais du diable s\'il ne s\'en repent pas! Je viens de trouver mon enseigne: Aux Quatre Saisons, et je me plante près de l\'Opéra!  Elle le regarda, ses yeux s\'assombrirent.
FRENCH   Ce n\'est pas ça, voici la poche qui reparaît...
FRENCH   Clara, maintenue au rayon par le caprice de Mouret, trouvait ça «très chic»; Marguerite racontait l\'exaspération de Bourdoncle; tandis que Mme Aurélie, vexée, déclarait que Mme Frédéric aurait au moins dû la prévenir, car on n\'avait pas idée d\'une dissimulation pareille.
ENGLISH   Then they went on to speak of a piece at the Gaiety, in which some lovely little children danced better than any grown-up persons.
ENGLISH   She set up a laugh, and embraced her a second time exclaiming: \"But, my darling, when you meet and like each other! You are really droll! Look here, would you like Baugé to take us somewhere in the country on Sunday? He\'ll bring one of his friends.\"  \"No,\" again said Denise in her gently obstinate way.
FRENCH   Lorsque le temps permettait de ne pas allumer, c\'était plus triste encore.
FRENCH    -- Moi, dit Mme de Boves, je ne connais pas de créatures plus désagréables...
FRENCH   Les autres étaient donc partis? que faisait-elle sur cette chaise? Et, tout d\'un coup, des sanglots l\'étouffèrent, sa tête retomba au bord de la table.
FRENCH    Deloche était devenu blême.
ENGLISH    Madame Marty and her daughter experienced some disappointment, however.
ENGLISH   Void of customers during the day, this café filled at about half-past eight with an overflowing crowd of employees, the stream of shopmen which rolled into the street from the great doorway in the Place Gaillon.
FRENCH   Il se tint debout près d\'eux, il écouta le baron qui murmurait de son air galant d\'ancien viveur:  -- Dites, je crois qu\'elles se vengent?  -- Qui donc? demanda Mouret, embarrassé.
ENGLISH   And as he appeared so woe-begone she did not draw it away.
FRENCH   Enfin, je tenais à t\'avertir.
FRENCH   Elle n\'avait jamais eu ni une exigence ni un calcul.
FRENCH    Mouret voulut couper court, par une dernière dureté.
FRENCH   Je remonte aussi...
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle thereupon resumed his walk, bowing as usual before the superiority of the governor, whose genius, with all its lapses, disconcerted him.
ENGLISH   But, just at that moment, Denise passed by.
ENGLISH   Baudu with his bile rising to his face had to make an effort to continue smiling.
FRENCH   Alors, mon Dieu! il faut se laisser aller...
ENGLISH   And the distant roar of the stock-taking, the millions of goods enumerated on all sides and thrown about in every direction, were like a warm breeze wafting the breath of passion towards her.
ENGLISH    \"You are still resolved to leave us?\" asked Mouret, in a trembling voice.
ENGLISH   He was obliged to reply, wasn\'t he? Besides, could any one have foreseen such a row over so trifling a matter? What had come on the governor lately, that he should be so unbearable?  \"We all know what\'s the matter with him,\" replied Hutin.
FRENCH    -- Et j\'ai songé cette nuit à autre chose, expliqua Mouret.
FRENCH   Je vous jure que je voulais vous dire autre chose.
FRENCH   Une main s\'était posée sur son bras, Mme Aurélie l\'interpellait avec sévérité.
FRENCH   Mouret lui ayant parlé de son mariage avec Mlle de Boves, il répondit que, malgré l\'obstination de la tante à ne pas mourir, l\'affaire allait être conclue; du moins, il le pensait, les parents étaient d\'accord, lui affectait de n\'avoir pas de volonté.
FRENCH    Comment! volé! Enfin, il comprit.
ENGLISH   He\'s been forced to spend all his savings on his mania for extensions and advertisements.
FRENCH    Cependant, Denise, avertie par la rumeur légère, avait levé la tête.
FRENCH   Sur les murs, peints à l\'huile d\'une teinte jaune clair, les casiers aux serviettes étaient les seuls ornements.
FRENCH    Très pâle, il l\'écoutait; et, à chacune des phrases qu\'elle lui jetait à la face, entre ses dents serrées, il avait un petit tremblement des lèvres.
ENGLISH   The silk salesmen were especially excited, for they had been indulging in heavy bets on the affair.
FRENCH    -- Monsieur, répétait Hutin, je comptais vous soumettre cette baisse...
ENGLISH   She appeared quite moved by the delicacy of the monogram, seized indeed by a desire which so stirred her as to make her turn pale; and suddenly turning she continued: \"Give us your opinion, Monsieur Mouret.
ENGLISH   How he does walk!\"  \"He\'s got his French horn,\" added Pauline, leaning out.
FRENCH   Seuls, dans son visage blanc, les yeux vivaient encore; et, la tête droite, elle les tournait obstinément vers le Bonheur des Dames, en face, à travers les petits rideaux des fenêtres.
ENGLISH   They overwhelmed her with spiteful allusions.
FRENCH   D\'un blond cendré, ils lui tombaient jusqu\'aux chevilles; et, quand elle se coiffait, ils la gênaient, au point qu\'elle se contentait de les rouler et de les retenir en un tas, sous les fortes dents d\'un peigne de corne.
FRENCH   Le trouble de Denise avait augmenté; mais une joie inondait son coeur.
ENGLISH   I was coming down the Rue de la Michodière--and I fancied that The Paradise people were laughing at me--that big rascally house seemed to crush me--so, when the omnibus came up, I thought of Lhomme and his arm, and threw myself under the wheels.\"  Madame Robineau had slowly fallen on to the floor, horrified by this confession.
FRENCH   Elle était peut-être la femme qui devait venir et qui vengerait les autres.
ENGLISH    \"Would you kindly tell me the kind of garment you require, madame?\" asked Denise, once more, with her polite persistence, which nothing could discourage.
FRENCH   Puis, comme Denise prenait le paletot, pour faire elle- même le «rendu», elle se récria et appela une auxiliaire.
ENGLISH   What particularly enraged him was that he knew the customer very well, an adorable blonde who often came to their department, and whom the salesmen called amongst themselves \"the pretty lady,\" knowing nothing of her except her looks, not even her name.
FRENCH   La situation de premier vous était promise depuis longtemps, lorsque Bouthemont, qui arrivait du dehors et qui n\'avait aucun titre, l\'a obtenue du coup.
FRENCH   Maintenant, elle se trouvait réduite à économiser les trente sous d\'une voiture, elle rentrait malade de s\'être arrêtée devant les étalages.
FRENCH   Pourquoi la blessait-il avec tout cet argent, lorsqu\'elle débordait de gratitude et qu\'il l\'eût fait défaillir d\'une seule parole amie? Il se rapprochait, en continuant de plaisanter, lorsque, à son grand mécontentement, Bourdoncle parut, sous le prétexte de lui apprendre le chiffre des entrées, l\'énorme chiffre de soixante-dix mille clientes, venues au Bonheur ce jour-là.
FRENCH   Baudu, souffrant lui-même de cette obsession, de la fixité désespérée de ces regards, voulait parfois tirer les grands rideaux.
ENGLISH   The least he can do, as he has sold me such a frightful mantle, is to give me the benefit of his experience.
ENGLISH   It was abominable, they were dragging the honour of his race into the gutter, the world seemed to be coming to an end.
FRENCH   Possible que je reste sur le carreau.
ENGLISH   They are full of fire, it\'s only natural.
ENGLISH   \"Who gave you the order to do so?\"  The second-hand, who was making a great fuss over this work, as if he wished to attract the governor\'s attention and foresaw the result, replied with an innocent, astonished air: \"Why, Monsieur Hutin told me, sir.\"  \"Monsieur Hutin! Where is Monsieur Hutin?\"  And when the latter came up from the receiving department where a salesman had been sent to fetch him, an animated explanation ensued.
FRENCH   laws alone swamp our small staff.
FRENCH    Il sourit, il la regarda avec une indulgence paternelle.
FRENCH   Aussitôt, Pépé monta sur les genoux de sa soeur, tandis que Jean, adossé contre une boiserie, se tenait près d\'elle.
FRENCH   C\'était comme une revanche de la semaine, de la soie le dimanche, lorsqu\'elle se trouvait condamnée à la laine dans son rayon; tandis que Denise, qui traînait sa soie d\'uniforme du lundi au samedi, reprenait le dimanche la laine mince de sa misère.
ENGLISH   \"Remember, mind, that our house will always be open to you; you\'ve only to knock, and I\'ll give you every compensation possible.
FRENCH   Il n\'y avait que moi! il n\'y avait que moi!  Denise, suffoquée, étourdie, écoutait ces affreux reproches.
ENGLISH    \"Leave it as it is; you\'ll see if it doesn\'t fetch the women on Monday.\"  Just then, as he rejoined Bourdoncle and Robineau, there arrived a woman, who stopped short, breathless at sight of this show.
FRENCH    Elle se décida enfin à ouvrir le sac.
FRENCH   Celui-ci ne les connaissait point, n\'ayant plus remis les pieds là-bas, depuis qu\'il en était parti tout jeune, pour entrer comme petit commis chez le drapier Hauchecorne, dont il avait fini par épouser la fille.
FRENCH   Ne pouvant plus payer la pension de Pépé, elle l\'avait repris et le couchait sur une vieille bergère prêtée par Bourras.
ENGLISH   But it took her ten minutes to reach it, so dense was the crowd becoming.
ENGLISH   But at last he said: \"You go too quick, little mother.\"  At this she sat down on a bench; and as he was tired, the child went to sleep on her lap.
FRENCH   Enfin, Mouret osa le chiffre de cinq francs; chez lui, le personnel était pâle, glacé d\'un tel défi à la fortune.
ENGLISH   All these things were heaped up on the chair, the number of parcels still increased, making the chair creak; and the salesmen who succeeded one another, found it more and more difficult to drag the improvised vehicle along as its load became heavier and heavier.
FRENCH    Le lendemain, au déjeuner, comme Robineau l\'avait envoyée en course et qu\'elle passait devant le Vieil Elbeuf, elle poussa la porte, en voyant Colomban seul dans la boutique.
FRENCH   Moi, j\'ai affaire au premier...
FRENCH   Vous suivez, n\'est-ce pas? rien de plus clair.
FRENCH    -- Et qu\'est-ce que tu gagnes? reprit Mouret.
ENGLISH   Baugé, who did the honours of his room, which was furnished with some old Empire furniture, given him by his father, got angry when Denise spoke of settling up, but at last accepted the fifteen francs twelve sous which she had laid on the chest of drawers; however, he insisted on making her a cup of tea, and after struggling with a spirit-lamp and saucepan, was obliged to go and fetch some sugar.
FRENCH   Mais un soulèvement de son être protestait, sans indignation contre les autres, répugnant simplement aux choses salissantes et déraisonnables.
FRENCH   Le baron lui disait de son air paternel et railleur à la fois:  -- Allez, allez donc, mon cher.
FRENCH    -- Mademoiselle, dit-il enfin, en tâchant de garder une sévérité froide, il y a des choses que nous ne pouvons tolérer...
FRENCH   Elle ne détournait pas les regards, elle avait seulement pâli davantage.
FRENCH    Seulement, la lingère n\'était pas en train de plaisanter.
ENGLISH   \"We mustn\'t lose heart.
ENGLISH    \"But they are not worth more,\" murmured Madame Guibal.
FRENCH   Elle seule continuait à approuver la seconde de résister à Mouret, hochant la tête, n\'avouant pas l\'enfant qu\'elle avait fait par hasard, mais déclarant que, si l\'on se doutait des embarras d\'une bêtise, on aimerait mieux se bien conduire.
ENGLISH   Everything had disappeared, his former uproarious victories, his future colossal fortune.
ENGLISH   And the effects of this scourge, this pest, are felt as far as the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs, where I hear that Messrs.
ENGLISH   How could a person truss herself up in that way! The young girl went and awkwardly wrote her name on the list, where she found herself last.
FRENCH   Enfin, elle dit:  -- Leur Paris-Bonheur est beaucoup plus fort.
FRENCH   Bédoré et soeur s\'appuyait sur une canne, travaillé de tels soucis, que sa maladie d\'estomac s\'aggravait.
ENGLISH   For instance, that year his capital, which only amounted to five hundred thousand francs, had been turned over four times, and had thus produced business to the amount of two millions.
ENGLISH   He had already received the promise of the first-hand\'s place, but Hutin, who was aware of it, instead of attacking his old comrade looked upon him as a clever fellow.
FRENCH    Deloche, cependant, assis entre Baugé et Liénard, se trouvait presque en face de Favier, à quelques places de distance.
ENGLISH    Denise noticed that Bourras was pre-occupied during the next fortnight.
ENGLISH    \"These chickens are all legs!\" remarked Mignot.
ENGLISH   And from this point the ladies already began to smell the perfumery department, for its penetrating odour scented the whole gallery.
FRENCH   Elle rougit légèrement.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s a travelling cloak that madame desires, I believe?\" inquired Denise of Madame Desforges, after offering her a chair.
ENGLISH    \"Ah,\" said the young man, \"if ever she succeeds anywhere else, I should like to see her come back here, and trample on all those good-for-nothing creatures!\"  It was Bourdoncle who in this affair had to bear the brunt of Mouret\'s anger.
ENGLISH   Yes, alone--you understand! One at all events will never bow his head.
FRENCH   On ne doit pas tenter à ce point de pauvres femmes sans défense.
FRENCH   Cela partait de haut, des pièces de lainage et de draperie, mérinos, cheviottes, molletons, tombaient de l\'entresol, flottantes comme des drapeaux, et dont les tons neutres, gris ardoise, bleu marine, vert olive, étaient coupés par les pancartes blanches des étiquettes.
FRENCH    Mouret la regarda fixement, effleuré d\'un soupçon.
FRENCH   Il était dix heures moins un quart, la première table venait d\'être sonnée.
FRENCH   Puis, ils causèrent devant la fenêtre du salon voisin, debout, baissant la voix.
ENGLISH   However, the workmen, in order to knock one of the walls down at a blow, had attacked it at its base.
ENGLISH   This vast establishment, in which she was quite at home, ended by troubling them; and they sheltered themselves in her shadow, placing themselves again under the protection of this second mother of theirs as in an instinctive re-awakening of their infancy.
FRENCH   On racontait que l\'ancien capital de Mouret, les premiers cinq cent mille francs augmentés chaque année de la totalité des bénéfices, un capital qui devait être à cette heure de quatre millions, avait ainsi passé dix fois en marchandises, dans les comptoirs.
ENGLISH   In the distance, beyond streaks of shadow, were counters sparkling and swarming with a throng, ablaze with sunshine.
ENGLISH   \"A woman who looks like a horse.
FRENCH   Je n\'oserais vendre la pareille plus de quatre- vingt-dix francs.
ENGLISH   Look at me, I was a probationer, like you, without a sou.
FRENCH    -- C\'est votre frère, n\'est-ce pas? demanda-t-il encore, les yeux sur Pépé..
FRENCH   Le Bonheur seul, un jour, couvrirait le quartier de sa toiture.
FRENCH   Il n\'y a pas de comparaison.
ENGLISH    \"That\'s what gives the women such funny eyes here, then,\" murmured Vallagnosc, \"I\'ve been watching them with their greedy, shameful looks, like mad creatures.
ENGLISH    \"Come, leave him alone, he doesn\'t hurt you,\" he said.
ENGLISH   She experienced, too, a shattering of her whole frame; the constant weariness of her legs painfully affected her system and her face was ever pale.
ENGLISH    The affair greatly bothered Bouthemont, whose gaiety ill-accorded with such worries.
FRENCH   Deloche frémissait, ses yeux finirent par se fixer sur Favier, qui répétait avec insistance:  -- S\'il ne l\'a pas eue, il va l\'avoir...
FRENCH   Cependant, il fut pris d\'une hésitation, car on recommandait aux vendeurs de ne pas amonceler ainsi les dentelles précieuses, et il s\'était laissé voler dix mètre de malines, la semaine précédente.
FRENCH     Section 1.
FRENCH   C\'est très embarrassant.
FRENCH   Quand il la vit sourire, au fond du grand salon et qu\'il aperçut deux autres dames prêtant l\'oreille, il s\'égaya le premier de ses phrases.
FRENCH   Et l\'évidente bienveillance de Mouret ne la rassurait pas, elle continuait à le redouter, à ressentir près de lui ce malaise qu\'elle expliquait par un trouble bien naturel, devant l\'homme puissant dont sa destinée dépendait.
ENGLISH   \"Oh! certainly,\" she murmured.
ENGLISH   \"Thus I am quite sure that her buyers will snap up our Paris Delight.
ENGLISH   And again Hutin had to make a halt, parcel in hand.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s your business, you can do as you like,\" repeated Baudu.
FRENCH   Il descendit de l\'escabeau, un autre vendeur prit sa place; et il lui fallut enjamber la houle des pièces d\'étoffe, qui avait encore monté sur les parquets.
ENGLISH    \"You\'ll go and see, to-morrow, won\'t you, Denise?\" asked the draper, tormented with uncertainty, but feeling that his niece was conquered like the rest.
FRENCH    -- Qu\'il achète la maison, il la payera quatre fois sa valeur!...
FRENCH   Il alla jeter un coup d\'oeil dans la rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, par les hautes glaces de la fenêtre, puis revint en disant:  -- Vous savez qu\'elles se vengeront.
ENGLISH   This was to her an ever-open sore; she was slowly dying from sheer grief at seeing The Old Elbeuf humiliated; if she still lived it was, as in the case of the shop itself, solely by the effect of impulsion; but she well realised that the death of the shop would be hers as well, and that she would pass away on the day when it should close.
ENGLISH   There was a silence.
FRENCH   Et cette mer, ces chapeaux bariolés, ces cheveux nus, blonds ou noirs, roulaient d\'un bout de la galerie à l\'autre, confus et décolorés au milieu de l\'éclat vibrant des étoffes.
FRENCH    Mais la malade eut un hochement de tête obstiné.
ENGLISH   \"No, she looks far too lady-like.
FRENCH    -- Voilà, madame, tout ce que je puis faire, dit enfin Denise en se relevant.
ENGLISH   Without doubt, fear was gaining on her, and, to give herself time to collect her courage, she began slowly walking down the Rue Gaillon, and then along the Rue Saint-Roch.
ENGLISH   Denise, whose eyelids were also moistening with pity, asked her: \"Does my aunt suspect anything?\"  \"Yes, mamma has her suspicions, I think.
ENGLISH   It was like the stage-door exit of some theatre where figurantes predominate.
ENGLISH    What most troubled Denise, however, was that she had discovered Colomban\'s secret.
ENGLISH   What she had said was out of pure kindness of heart, for she felt really grieved to see a comrade so miserable.
FRENCH   Albert, réveillé, jura avoir vu la seconde des confections entre deux militaires, au Gros-Caillou.
FRENCH   Elle baissa la voix.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, est-ce qu\'un homme aurait voulu d\'elle, sans un sou, pas plus grosse qu\'un mauviette, et pas belle encore? Non, non, jamais elle ne se marierait, elle avait assez de deux enfants.
FRENCH   Juillet chauffait les ruisseaux, Paris avait sa lumière crayeuse d\'été, aux aveuglantes réverbérations.
FRENCH   Vingt chambres pareilles s\'alignaient le long d\'un corridor de couvent, peint en jaune; et, sur les trente-cinq demoiselles de la maison, les vingt qui n\'avaient pas de famille à Paris couchaient là, tandis que les quinze autres logeaient au-dehors, quelques- unes chez des tantes ou des cousines d\'emprunt.
ENGLISH    \"But he\'s only got one arm,\" all of a sudden said Baugé, who had kept his eyes on Lhomme.
FRENCH   Puis, il reprit d\'un ton bourru:  -- Je ne vous mets pas à la porte...
FRENCH   Elle n\'était point révoltée, il lui semblait bien permis d\'arranger l\'existence comme on l\'entendait, lorsqu\'on se trouvait seule et libre sur la terre.
FRENCH   Tout pliait devant Mme Aurélie, quand elle croyait avoir à défendre son autorité.
FRENCH   Cependant, Mme Aurélie l\'examinait avec une moue inquiète.
FRENCH   Sans doute, Mouret comprit la cause de sa rougeur, car il ajouta vivement:  -- Écoutez, mademoiselle, j\'ai des excuses à vous présenter...
FRENCH   Autour des colonnes, descendaient des volants de malines et de valenciennes, des jupes blanches de danseuses, déroulées en un frisson blanc, jusqu\'à terre.
ENGLISH   Deslignières will die of apoplexy, Piot and Rivoire have had the jaundice.
ENGLISH   Already, on seeing the boats from the bank she had felt a shiver; but now she no longer had any doubt at seeing that girl with Hutin.
ENGLISH   And as Madame Bourdelais asked her if she was going to make any purchases, she replied with her languorous air, veiling the egoistical greediness of her glance with her eyelids:  \"Oh! no.
ENGLISH   Baugé even went out before him, and Baugé was, as a rule, the last to leave, taking a circuitous route so as to meet Pauline on he way to the ladies\' dining-room; a manœuvre they had arranged between them--the only chance they had of seeing one another for a minute during business hours.
FRENCH    La petite vendeuse, sans cesser de passer des rotondes, répondit que, si on ne lui donnait pas huit cents francs, elle lâcherait la boîte.
ENGLISH   The youngsters, as she still called them, had now grown to be big fellows.
ENGLISH   The young men took clean plates from the piles standing at equal distances on the table whilst the waiters handed round the dessert, which consisted of peaches, in baskets.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! good!\" murmured Liénard, who had heard everything, \"you\'re talking about the young girl with the sprain.
ENGLISH   Outside, a distant tumult was commencing to rise, inquisitive folks were jostling in front of the windows, cabs were taking up their positions on the Place Gaillon, there were all the appearances of a crowd\'s approach.
ENGLISH    \"I say,\" he cried, \"are you as virtuous as ever at the Bon Marché?\"  \"Not so much as all that,\" replied Baugé, turning very red.
ENGLISH   \"Whatever\'s the matter?\"  Thereupon he blushed, and explained that he had met a friend\'s sister.
FRENCH   Il lui assurait qu\'il n\'avait pas besoin d\'intervenir, il expliquait de quelle façon les choses allaient certainement se passer, sans paraître lui-même s\'émouvoir de ce vol, comme s\'il l\'avait prévu depuis longtemps.
ENGLISH   She had just experienced another grief, Deloche had informed her of his dismissal, and when she had tried to retain him, offering to speak in his favour, he had obstinately declined to struggle against his bad luck; he wanted to disappear, he said, what was the use of staying? Why should he interfere with people who were happy? Then Denise had bade him a sisterly farewell, her eyes full of tears.
ENGLISH   But this time it has not succeeded at all.
ENGLISH   And now more smashes were on the point of being added to those long since foreseen; the fancy goods department threatened a dealer in the Rue Saint-Roch, Deslignières, a big, full-blooded man; whilst the furniture department was injuring Messrs.
FRENCH   J\'ai envie de donner aux employés du bureau de défalcation une petite prime, pour chaque erreur qu\'ils relèveront dans les notes de débit, en les collationnant...
ENGLISH   The employees in the glove and silk departments had laughingly offered to relieve him of his burden, the men in the drapery and woollen departments had longed to see him make a false step, which would have scattered the gold all over the place.
FRENCH   Justement, Mme Aurélie se fâchait contre Denise.
FRENCH    C\'était une petite blonde de trente ans, le nez fin, les yeux vifs, une amie de pension d\'Henriette, qui avait épousé un sous- chef du ministère des Finances.
FRENCH   Elle murmura, la voix tremblante:  -- Mais, monsieur, il y a des vendeuses beaucoup plus anciennes que moi au rayon.
ENGLISH   What would become of me?\" said Pauline; and as Denise replied that she intended to leave the next day: \"No, no,\" the other added, \"you think so, but I know better.
ENGLISH   \"You are really too kind, sir.\"  Mouret, who took a personal pleasure in satisfying other people\'s passions, sometimes gave Lhomme the tickets forced upon him by lady patronesses and he put the finishing touch to the old man\'s delight by remarking: \"Ah, Beethoven! ah, Mozart! What music!\" Then, without waiting for a reply, he went off, rejoining Bourdoncle, who had already started on his tour of inspection through the departments.
FRENCH   Et vous savez que Mme Aurélie et toute sa clique ont dû prendre le train de Rambouillet qui part à six heures vingt-cinq...
FRENCH    -- Oh! voyez donc, dit-elle, ces costumes de toile, pour dix-neuf francs soixante-quinze!  Dans leurs cartons carrés, les costumes noués d\'une faveur, étaient pliés de façon à présenter les garnitures seules, brodées de bleu et de rouge; et, occupant l\'angle de chaque carton, une gravure montrait le vêtement tout fait, porté par une jeune personne aux airs de princesse.
FRENCH   Quand elle le voyait torturé, expiant si durement son dédain de la femme, il lui semblait racheté de ses fautes.
ENGLISH   They had glanced at each other with a rancorous look.
ENGLISH   You are as fresh as a rose.\"  \"Oh! I\'m almost too well,\" she replied.
FRENCH   Des larmes lui montaient aux yeux.
FRENCH   Quand il vit sa femme, deux grosses larmes coulèrent sur ses joues.
ENGLISH    At first, they both crossed the bed-room, silent and empty.
FRENCH   Mais elle n\'a pas l\'air très au courant, elle ne trouve rien.
FRENCH   Dès qu\'il eut ouvert la porte, au premier étage, on entendit une faible voix, une voix éperdue, criant:  -- Oh! je ne veux pas être seule...
ENGLISH   Have you no heart? Can\'t you see that Geneviève loves you, and that it\'s killing her.\"  She was trembling, her fever of the previous night had taken possession of her again.
FRENCH    -- Non, non, oh! laissez-moi, vous me torturez!  Peu à peu, il défaillait, ce dernier obstacle le rendait fou.
FRENCH   Allons! le duel était fini, Henriette restait par terre, elle ne serait certainement pas la femme qui devait venir.
FRENCH   Il clignait les yeux d\'un air d\'intelligence, il finissait par admirer l\'inventeur de cette mécanique à manger les femmes.
FRENCH   Devant une séduction si maîtresse d\'elle-même, assez forte pour jouer ainsi de la femme, sans se prendre aux ivresses qu\'elle exhale, le baron Hartmann, qui ne le quittait pas du regard, sentait son admiration grandir.
ENGLISH   Already intoxicated, he was knocking his glass on the table, and talking of drubbing the waiter if he did not bring some _liqueurs_ immediately.
ENGLISH   He slept in his department, on a little iron bedstead which he set up himself every evening; and he was not asleep yet, but with open eyes was rememorating aloud the pleasant hours he had spent that evening.
ENGLISH   Public cabs mixed with private broughams, the drivers waiting about the wheels and the horses neighing and shaking their curb-chains which sparkled in the sun.
FRENCH   C\'était vrai, du reste.
FRENCH    Mouret, maintenant, se dressait devant elle, avec sa tête passionnée, aux yeux caressants.
ENGLISH   Very intelligent and very active, it then seemed as if he would easily supplant his comrade, who was much less steady, and far too fond of love-affairs; but he had neither the instinctive genius of the impassioned Southerner, nor his audacity, nor his winning grace.
ENGLISH   Everybody liked artichoke.
FRENCH   Comme elle les aimait! Et il fit quelques pas; puis, il revint lui dire à l\'oreille:  -- Montez à mon cabinet, après la vente.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! c\'est vous, chère madame?  -- Mais oui, chère madame...
FRENCH   Je vais t\'expliquer...
FRENCH   Il continuait à boire, entre chaque phrase, une petite gorgée de thé, dont le parfum attiédissait ces odeurs plus âpres, où il y avait une pointe de fauve.
ENGLISH   At last she stopped opposite one of these.
FRENCH   Après le conseil, elle l\'accompagnait, faisait avec lui l\'inspection quotidienne des comptoirs, revenait l\'après-midi dans le cabinet de la direction, restait près de son fauteuil de deux à quatre, pendant qu\'il recevait toute une foule, les fabricants de la France entière, de hauts industriels, des banquiers, des inventeurs: va-et-vient continu de la richesse et de l\'intelligence, danse affolée des millions, entretiens rapides où l\'on brassait les plus grosses affaires du marché de Paris.
FRENCH   Quelques minutes se passèrent, personne n\'avait la charité de tirer la jeune fille de sa gêne.
ENGLISH   They sell theirs at five francs sixty, don\'t they? Well! this will be two sous cheaper, and that will suffice to upset them.\"  At this Robineau\'s eyes lighted up again.
FRENCH   C\'est absolument ce qu\'il vous faut.
ENGLISH   She had been keeping them back for some time past; but beneath this last insult her whole being succumbed.
ENGLISH   What! a clever fellow like you, who floored all of us! And they only give you three thousand francs a year, after having already ground you down for five years! No, it isn\'t right!\" He paused and then thinking of his own good fortune resumed: \"As for me, I made them a humble bow long ago.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! it\'s you,\" he replied at last, when he recognised her.
ENGLISH    \"Fifteen francs a month.\"  She asked to see it.
FRENCH   Est-ce que cette sauvageonne finirait par devenir une jolie fille? Elle sentait bon de sa course au grand air, elle était charmante avec ses beaux cheveux épeurés sur son front.
ENGLISH   Order a garment to measure at our place, it will equal one from Sauveur\'s and cost you but half the money.
FRENCH   Six mille francs, un travail sans fatigue.
FRENCH    Lorsque Denise arriva au Vieil Elbeuf, Mme Baudu s\'y trouvait seule.
FRENCH   Sans doute, gagner de l\'argent n\'est pas tout.
FRENCH    International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
FRENCH   Les Baudu déjeunaient, on entendait le bruit des fourchettes, au fond de la petite salle.
ENGLISH   For him it was a very disagreeable revelation; for while he remained ignorant of it, he had no great blame to tax himself with.
ENGLISH   \"You were sitting down, sir; go and get paid!\" \"You dare to answer me; go and get paid!\" \"Your shoes have not been blackened; go and get paid!\" And even the bravest trembled in presence of the massacre which he left behind him.
FRENCH   L\'or fauve dominait, dans l\'effacement des tapis anciens, dont les teintes fanées gardaient une chaleur sombre, un fondu de fournaise éteinte, d\'une belle couleur cuite de vieux maître.
FRENCH   Toujours elle avait cédé ainsi au premier excès de sa sensibilité: des larmes la suffoquaient, sa passion doublait ses tourments; puis, elle rentrait dans sa raison, elle retrouvait un beau courage calme, une force de volonté douce et inexorable.
FRENCH    -- Sans doute, répondit Mme Desforges.
FRENCH   Alors, revenus à leur point de départ, debout près de la porte, au milieu des parapluies et des cravates, Mouret et Bourdoncle reçurent le rapport d\'un des quatre inspecteurs, chargés de la surveillance du magasin.
FRENCH   Non, elle n\'aimait personne.
ENGLISH   By his side Denise, with her rather long face, large mouth, fading complexion and light hair, appeared thinner still.
FRENCH   Là, vous n\'avez plus de bosse dans le dos, au moins...
ENGLISH   The baron is with us.\"  At this moment the spacious room was full of chatter.
ENGLISH   He finished by conjuring up things that frightened me.
ENGLISH   And he gravely resumed his position as sentinel.
ENGLISH    \"Hush! seventeen!\" he all at once hastily remarked to his colleague, intending by this peculiar exclamation to warn him of the approach of Mouret and Bourdoncle.
FRENCH   Par moments, une haleine fraîche montait des parquets, que des garçons de magasin arrosaient d\'un mince filet d\'eau.
ENGLISH   But you really have some extraordinarily fine lace just now.\"  This turned the attention from the fan, which the young man laid on the table.
FRENCH   Elle les bouscula, gagna de la place.
FRENCH   Cette dernière venait de suivre la scène, elle lui murmurait à l\'oreille:  -- Ma pauvre fille, ne soyez donc pas si sensible.
FRENCH   Accompagnez-nous dimanche, Baugé me mène à Joinville.
ENGLISH   So far, we are perfectly satisfied with you.
FRENCH   Il y avait là le ronflement continu de la machine à l\'oeuvre, un enfournement de clientes, entassées devant les rayons, étourdies sous les marchandises, puis jetées à la caisse.
ENGLISH   He was giving you messages for her, wasn\'t he? Oh! for pity\'s sake, tell me the truth; I assure you it will do me good.\"  Never before had Denise been in such an awkward position.
ENGLISH   That day, she seemed very gay; and so, on returning from the pay-desk whither he had conducted her, Favier remarked to Hutin: \"Perhaps she\'s going to marry again.\"  \"What! is she a widow?\" asked the other.
FRENCH   Mais, comme il les inquiétait et les ennuyait, toutes se hâtaient de fuir.
FRENCH    -- Rien, balbutia-t-elle, il fait un peu chaud.
FRENCH    C\'était la recette de la journée, la plus forte que le Bonheur eût encore faite.
ENGLISH    \"You must be fearfully robbed,\" murmured Vallagnosc, who thought that the crowd looked very criminal.
FRENCH    On ne le trouva pas tout de suite, il devait être entre les mains de l\'inspecteur Jouve.
FRENCH   Un ouvrier, imaginez-vous! oui, un sale petit ouvrier, avec des cheveux jaunes, qui la guettait à travers les vitres.
ENGLISH   The meal passed off in silence, but at dessert Madame Baudu, who was restless, left the shop, and came and sat down behind Denise.
FRENCH    Professor Michael S.
FRENCH    Mme de Boves, après s\'être longtemps promenée avec sa fille, rôdant devant les étalages, ayant le besoin sensuel d\'enfoncer les mains dans les tissus, venait de se décider à se faire montrer du point d\'Alençon par Deloche.
ENGLISH   He himself had received the business in a prosperous state, and did not wish to pass it on to his son-in-law with fewer customers or doubtful sales.
FRENCH   On avait apporté leur malle, ils coucheraient en haut, sous les toits.
FRENCH   Elle l\'avait embrassé, et elle pleurait, en le regardant de ses yeux fixes.
ENGLISH   If Vinçard wanted to sell it was time for the rest to pack up, for Vinçard was like the rats who make haste to leave a house when it threatens ruin.
FRENCH    Mais on apportait le registre, et Mme Aurélie revint vers Denise.
ENGLISH   The goods had been taken and sold, the rooms cleared; however, he still obstinately remained in the corner where he slept, and from which out of pity they did not like to drive him.
FRENCH   Et Mouret touchait enfin à la réalisation de son rêve: cette façade qui allait grandir sur la rue du Dix- Décembre, était comme l\'épanouissement même de sa fortune.
FRENCH   Mais il se sentait plus fort chez Henriette, il savait combien la possession commune d\'une maîtresse rapproche et attendrit.
FRENCH   Il était bien heureux, il venait d\'apprendre la grande nouvelle, tout le magasin en causait, disait-il.
ENGLISH   Mouret was once more going through the departments.
ENGLISH   And he, who during the last six months had treated her like a child, sometimes giving her advice, yielding to a desire to inform himself, to a wicked wish to know how a woman grew up and became lost in Paris, no longer laughed, but experienced a feeling of surprise and fear mingled with tenderness.
ENGLISH    \"No, it seems not; though my opinion was all the other way.\"  The whole department was now joking about the affair, without, however, allowing the work to suffer.
ENGLISH   They were intoxicating themselves with their prolonged contemplation of it.
FRENCH   Elle poussa un léger cri, la douleur qu\'elle ressentait aux poignets lui rendit son courage.
ENGLISH   And it was now only a question of days, the crumbling away had nearly finished, the very ceilings seemed to be falling and turning into dust, even an old worm-eaten structure is carried away by the wind.
ENGLISH    They had relapsed into silence, and were eating some preserved French beans, when at last she ventured to remark in a cheerful tone: \"The public does not complain.\"  At this Madame Robineau could not restrain a little laugh, which annoyed both her husband and Gaujean.
FRENCH    Denise l\'écoutait, immobile de saisissement.
ENGLISH   You want some promises, there you are! But all the while they continue feeding you on old boot-leather, and chuck you out like dogs!\"  The salesman who had already questioned him thereupon repeated: \"You say that Robineau----\"  But a clatter of heavy crockery-ware drowned his voice.
FRENCH   Les escaliers étaient garnis de draperies blanches, des draperies de piqué et de basin alternées, qui filaient le long des rampes, entouraient les halls, jusqu\'au second étage; et cette montée du blanc prenait des ailes, se pressait et se perdait, comme une envolée de cygnes.
ENGLISH   To restrain the thirsty crowd, they had been obliged to imitate the practice followed at theatres and railway-stations, by erecting a barrier draped with velvet.
FRENCH    1.F.5.
FRENCH    -- Non, monsieur Bourras.
ENGLISH   And after those will come others and still others! All the businesses in the neighbourhood will collapse.
FRENCH   Mes frères doivent se trouver chez mon oncle, et j\'ai promis de dîner avec eux.
FRENCH   Et, lorsqu\'il partit, Bourras, heureux de cette réconciliation, lui cria encore:  -- Corrigez-la, elle a du bon...
FRENCH   N\'était-ce point assez déjà d\'avoir à se défendre contre lui? aurait-elle encore à se défendre contre elle, contre les souffles de tendresse qui lui ôtaient par moments tout courage? Quand il lui parlait ainsi, quand elle le voyait si ému, si bouleversé, elle ne savait plus pourquoi elle se refusait; et elle ne retrouvait qu\'ensuite, au fond même de sa nature de fille bien portante, la fierté et la raison qui la tenaient debout, dans son obstination de vierge.
ENGLISH   \"If papa were dead I would jolly soon clear out of this! Still it exasperates me to see seven thousand francs given to that strip of a girl! What do you say?\"  Madame Aurélie, turning round with her imperial air, violently interrupted the conversation.
FRENCH   Les dividendes stupéfient la Bourse...
ENGLISH    \"Well, well,\" suddenly said Baudu, \"let\'s come to an understanding.
FRENCH   Brusquement, dans l\'entrebâillement de la porte, elle reconnut Mouret.
ENGLISH   From the outset, long before the shop was full, there was such a crush at the doorway that they were obliged to call the police to regulate the traffic on the foot pavement.
ENGLISH   Wait till you know, before serving our regular customers.\"  The young girl retired, and as tears were coming to her eyes, and she wished to conceal her sensibility, she turned her back and stood up before the window, pretending to gaze into the street.
FRENCH    -- Si madame voulait bien m\'indiquer le genre? demandait de nouveau Denise, avec son insistance polie que rien ne décourageait.
FRENCH    Presque tous les mois, Bouthemont allait ainsi en fabrique, vivant des journées à Lyon, descendant dans les premiers hôtels, ayant l\'ordre de traiter les fabricants à bourse ouverte.
ENGLISH   There you are; it\'s all I have to offer.\"  \"I shall be very well here,\" declared the young girl.
ENGLISH   He knew the sex to be incapable of resisting anything cheap.
FRENCH    -- Ne vous plaignez donc pas! dit Favier.
FRENCH   Le jour vint où les échéances furent lourdes.
ENGLISH   People could not reasonably expect him to ruin himself to save the neighbourhood.
FRENCH    Denise cherchait des yeux son frère Jean.
FRENCH   Les commis changeaient d\'assiettes eux-mêmes, les piles diminuaient, à gauche et à droite.
FRENCH   Devant elles, s\'étendaient les magasins, les plus vastes magasins du monde, comme disaient-les réclames.
FRENCH   Allons, monsieur Favier, c\'est à vous.
FRENCH   Clara avait disparu depuis un mois, enlevée selon les uns par le mari d\'une acheteuse, tombée à la débauche de la rue, selon les autres.
ENGLISH   The builder\'s carts blocked up his doorway; the picks tapped on his walls; umbrellas and sticks, everything in his place, danced about to the noise of the hammers.
FRENCH   Puis, Mme de Boves parla de son mari, qui, disait-elle, venait de partir en inspection, pour visiter le dépôt d\'étalons de Saint-Lô, et, justement, Henriette racontait que la maladie d\'une tante avait appelé la veille Mme Guibal en Franche-Comté.
ENGLISH   He was aware that the Crédit Immobilier was secretly buying up the houses forming part of the same block as The Ladies\' Paradise, not only those which were to fall under the demolishers\' pickaxes, but the others as well, those which were to remain standing; and he suspected the existence of a project for founding some great establishment, which made him anxious about those enlargements of his own premises of which he was ever dreaming, seized with fear at the idea that he might one day come into collision with a powerful company owning property which they certainly would not sell.
FRENCH    -- Non, écoutez, dit-elle d\'une voix encore tremblante, je n\'ai aucune colère contre vous.
ENGLISH   Madame Desforges might have gone on her way, and thus have liberated Denise more speedily, but she seemed happy to feel her behind her, motionless and patient, whilst she also lingered, advising her friend.
FRENCH    Un silence régna.
ENGLISH    \"He is still at table,\" added the other.
FRENCH   Vous n\'aurez qu\'à y frapper, je vous donnerai toutes les compensations désirables...
ENGLISH   But it\'s impossible to do so downstairs.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, elle avait d\'autres ennuis, des soucis matériels qui la préoccupaient davantage.
FRENCH   Denise, touchée aux larmes, le trouvait bien changé par le chagrin.
FRENCH   Toute la boutique était secouée, il passait ses après-midi sans un client, dans la trépidation de la foule qui s\'écrasait au Bonheur des Dames.
ENGLISH   And the catastrophe had arrived; no one in the world could now prevent it.
FRENCH   Il avait eu, l\'avant-veille, une explication vive avec la direction, et il se sentait condamné.
ENGLISH   I have an idea of giving the clearing-house clerks a little bonus for every error they detect while checking the bills.
FRENCH   de Boves, M.
FRENCH   Très flatté au fond, il répondit d\'un air de mépris:  -- Je les aime plus étoffées, mon cher, et puis on ne va pas avec tout le monde, comme le patron.
ENGLISH   Besides, Monsieur Mouret may say what he likes but she has the prettiest designs, designs that are not seen anywhere else.
ENGLISH   Was it possible? on such a day too, and with that creature! And when Mouret at last came out Bourdoncle spoke to him about the fancy silks, of which the stock left on hand would be something enormous This was a relief for Mouret, as it gave him an opportunity for shouting.
ENGLISH   Listen, I\'ve only had one sweet moment in my life, and that was when I met you at Joinville, do you remember? For a moment, under the trees, when it was so dark, I thought your arm trembled, and was stupid enough to imagine----\"  But she again interrupted him.
ENGLISH   I yield to force.\"  Bourdoncle took the paper, carefully folded it, and put it in a drawer, saying: \"You see it\'s in company; for ladies, after talking of dying rather than signing, generally forget to come and redeem these _billets doux_ of theirs.
ENGLISH   And as it was nearly midnight, she got up to leave.
ENGLISH   A crowd rushed forward, a panic arose: that breath of fear and pity which suddenly brings all the people in a street together.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! Paul! dit une voix derrière ces messieurs.
ENGLISH   Little by little his debts had increased, and, as a last resource, he had resolved to mortgage the old building in the Rue de la Michodière, where Finet, their ancestor, had founded the business.
FRENCH    -- Je vous ai encore aperçue, ce matin, causant là-haut, derrière les tapis.
ENGLISH   And she, indeed full of fear, now fairly fled.
FRENCH   Pourquoi n\'as-tu pas amené Jean?  -- Mais il devait venir, murmura Denise embarrassée.
FRENCH   Geneviève devait avoir un peu de raison et patienter jusqu\'à un meilleur inventaire.
FRENCH    En haut, sous les combles, se trouvaient les chambres où couchaient les vendeuses.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, voici un certificat.
FRENCH   Mouret, qui allait répondre, eut un léger sursaut.
FRENCH   Personne n\'avait dit son nom, mais il se désignait lui-même et elle le devinait maintenant, elle comprenait pourquoi ce jeune homme lui avait causé une telle émotion, dans la rue, au rayon des soieries, à présent encore.
ENGLISH   Whilst Mouret gazed at the cashiers bending over their ledgers, adding up long columns of figures, whilst he listened to the sound of the gold, falling from their fingers into the metal bowls, he already beheld The Ladies\' Paradise growing and growing, enlarging its hall and prolonging its galleries as far as the Rue du Dix-Décembre.
FRENCH   Je lui conseille de se présenter demain matin à Mme Aurélie, la première.
FRENCH    Mouret ne répondit pas tout de suite, il marchait de la fenêtre à la porte, en cherchant à vaincre sa violente émotion.
FRENCH   Cet aveu qu\'elle se faisait enfin, l\'emplissait de confusion.
ENGLISH   Both of them rose and passed into the other room.
FRENCH   D\'abord, au premier plan de cette gravure, la rue du Dix-Décembre, les rues de la Michodière et Monsigny, emplies de petites figures noires, s\'élargissaient démesurément, comme pour donner passage à la clientèle du monde entier.
FRENCH   Un véritable scandale!  -- Alors, rien du premier à la soie, rien du jeune homme des dentelles? répétait Bourdoncle.
FRENCH   Aujourd\'hui encore, ce Gaujean l\'a tourmenté, à propos de billets en retard...
FRENCH   Est-ce que j\'aurais dû tenir des saletés à un franc quatre-vingt-quinze?...
FRENCH   Les gants et la soie s\'étaient offerts en riant pour le soulager, la draperie et les lainages souhaitaient un faux pas, qui aurait semé l\'or aux quatre coins des rayons.
ENGLISH   At the same time, she had been quite right in refusing an invitation to dine at uncle Baudu\'s that evening, and in asking her aunt to take Pépé out for a walk, for she had placed him with Madame Gras again.
ENGLISH    \"No, sir, I cannot.
ENGLISH   And whilst she was posing there, with the stereotyped graces of a fashion-plate, she thought all the time of Pépé\'s board and lodging, which she had promised to pay that evening.
FRENCH   Favier, d\'habitude, affectait de s\'effacer, de reconnaître la supériorité de Hutin, quitte à le manger par-derrière.
ENGLISH   It was their sole thought in the shop, a thought which urged them into an incessant and pitiless struggle.
ENGLISH   Below them extended the immense glass roof of the central gallery, a lake of glass bounded by the distant housetops, as by a rocky coast.
FRENCH   Aussi, lorsqu\'une nouvelle cliente se présenta, intervint-il d\'un air sévère, en arrêtant le jeune homme qui se précipitait.
FRENCH    Toute une file de fiacres l\'empêchait de quitter le trottoir du Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH   Allons, adieu, je pars.
FRENCH    -- Oui, ces rhumatismes qui vous tourmentaient ici.
ENGLISH   But don\'t let that disturb you, no one will come.\"  Then he also took his stand at the edge of the pavement, waiting like the others.
ENGLISH   None of them touched Bourdoncle\'s heart, he treated them all with the disdain of a passionless man whose business was to live by them, and whose last illusions had been dispelled by seeing them so closely amidst the worries of his trade.
FRENCH    Le coup qui achevait Geneviève, était la disparition brusque de Colomban.
FRENCH   Ça ne marcherait pas, il était perdu, et il n\'aurait pu dire pourquoi: il croyait lire sa défaite sur les visages mêmes des dames qui passaient.
ENGLISH   It was Madame Guibal declaring that she would have preferred the flounces of old Alençon simply round the upper skirt of the dress.
ENGLISH   \"Did you hear the noise? The house is down.\"  \"Ah! it\'s true,\" he murmured, with an astonished look, \"that must have been the house.
ENGLISH   \"They\'ve paid you,\" she at length said softly.
ENGLISH   And the Japan goods, are they placed on the central landing? A last effort, my boys, you\'ll see the sale by-and-by.\"  Bourdoncle had also been there since daybreak.
FRENCH   Aussi Denise tourna-t-elle la clef vivement, pour que sa voisine ne fût pas surprise par Mme Cabin, qui veillait à la stricte observation du règlement.
FRENCH   Lui seul avait encore imaginé de placer au deuxième étage les comptoirs des tapis et des meubles, des comptoirs où les clientes étaient plus rares, et dont la présence au rez-de-chaussée aurait creusé des trous vides et froids.
ENGLISH    In the silk department there was also a crowd, the principal crush being opposite the inside display arranged by Hutin, to which Mouret had given the finishing touches.
ENGLISH    \"Forgive me,\" he murmured.
ENGLISH    Just at that moment, Mouret was absorbed in another wonderful inspiration.
ENGLISH   10, for Madame Desforges.\"  Just as she was going away, she recognised Madame Marty near her, accompanied by her daughter Valentine, a tall girl of fourteen, thin and bold, who already cast a woman\'s covetous looks on the materials.
FRENCH   La nuit s\'était faite, elle retrouva la rue noire, trempée d\'une pluie fine et drue, qui tombait depuis le coucher du soleil.
FRENCH   Elle en avait un peu peur, elle la sentait pourtant très bonne.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, laissez-le tranquille, il ne vous fait rien.
ENGLISH   The piles of garments strained her arms to such a degree that during the first six weeks she cried with pain when she turned over at night, her back aching and her shoulders bruised.
ENGLISH   Her ideas were ripening, a woman\'s grace was being evolved from the wildness of a child freshly arrived from Valognes.
FRENCH   Newby Chief Executive and Director gbnewby@pglaf.org  Section 4.
FRENCH   Aussi toute une aigreur grandissait-elle, dans sa loyauté maniaque de vieux commerçant.
ENGLISH   For the last two months Robineau, reduced to all sorts of shifts, had been leading a fearful life, trying to avert a declaration of bankruptcy.
FRENCH    -- Comment! déjà! cria Hutin.
FRENCH   Nous allons rire, un de ces jours.
FRENCH   Mais un bien-être les envahissait, il leur semblait entrer dans le printemps, au sortir de l\'hiver de la rue.
FRENCH    Et des crises la reprenaient, secouaient son corps frêle de grands frissons.
ENGLISH    \"Yes,\" replied Denise, blushing, \"I was accompanying a customer.\"  But this was a fib.
FRENCH   Quant à Mme Aurélie, muette, grave, elle promenait son masque de César à travers le vide du rayon, en général qui a une responsabilité dans la victoire et la défaite.
FRENCH   Seulement, je n\'ai pas de chance, il y a des jours de guigne, ma parole!...
FRENCH    Il répondit sans s\'arrêter:  -- Sans doute, mais que veux-tu que je fasse? J\'ai tâché de vendre, personne n\'est venu...
ENGLISH   From that moment a watch was kept, and the inspector caught Mignot in the act of facilitating the sleight of hand of a tall fair girl who had formerly been a saleswoman at the Louvre.
FRENCH   Elle baisa Pépé, le coeur gros, à l\'idée de leur prochaine séparation.
FRENCH   Entre chaque phrase, il buvait une cuillerée de thé, tout en protestant de son désespoir.
FRENCH   Puis, il monta.
FRENCH   Mme Aurélie, toute renseignée qu\'elle était, lui garda une sourde rancune; elle l\'avait vue rire avec Pauline, elle crut à une bravade, à des commérages sur les amours de son fils.
FRENCH   Vous manquez donc de coeur? vous ne voyez donc pas que Geneviève vous aime et qu\'elle en mourra?  Elle était toute frémissante, sa fièvre de la veille la secouait de nouveau.
ENGLISH   Pauline, who was still pressing her friend\'s hand, looked at her for a moment in silence, listening.
ENGLISH   A dreary cold hung about the ceiling; hours passed by without a customer coming to disturb the gloom, and the goods, no longer handled, became more and more musty every day.
FRENCH   La lettre glissa jusqu\'à terre, Denise regardait toujours la fenêtre, dont le plein soleil l\'éblouissait.
FRENCH   Comme Denise allait laisser son nom, Robineau rentra, et il la prit sur-le-champ, l\'une de ses deux vendeuses l\'ayant brusquement quitté la veille, pour entrer au Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH    Mme Baudu l\'écoutait, la tête droite sur l\'oreiller, si pâle, que son visage avait la couleur de la toile.
FRENCH    Dans la rue de la Michodière, Bourras était debout, planté sur le trottoir en face de sa maison, dont on l\'avait expulsé la veille, à la suite d\'un joli tour, une trouvaille de l\'avoué: comme Mouret possédait des créances, il venait d\'obtenir aisément la mise en faillite du marchand de parapluies, puis il avait acheté cinq cents francs le droit au bail, dans la vente faite par le syndic; de sorte que le vieillard entêté s\'était laissé prendre pour cinq cents francs ce qu\'il n\'avait pas voulu lâcher pour cent mille.
ENGLISH   Now and again, Mouret\'s voice was drowned by the noisy accompaniment, the formidable uproar of a kingly fortune gained in battle.
ENGLISH   They looked at her, then smiled at each other.
ENGLISH   Yes, we shall have done for all those slop-sellers who are dying of rheumatism in their cellars!\"  The shopmen checking the goods round-about were listening and smiling.
ENGLISH   In December, Baudu, terrified by the amount of his acceptances, resigned himself to a most cruel sacrifice: he sold his country-house at Rambouillet, a house which cost him a lot of money in continual repairs, and whose tenants had not even paid the rent when he decided to get rid of it.
ENGLISH    \"That\'s the house,\" said Jean.
ENGLISH   He detested these big-sale days, which tired him to death, and endeavoured to shirk his work, getting plenty of money from his father and not caring a fig about the business but doing only just enough to avoid being dismissed.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! do look,\" said she, \"at those print costumes at nineteen francs fifteen sous!\"  In their square pasteboard boxes lay the costumes, each tied round with a favour, and folded so as to show the blue and red embroidered trimmings; and, in a corner of each box, was an engraving depicting the garment completed, as worn by a young person resembling some princess.
ENGLISH   It was Madame Guibal, who had been slowly walking about the shop for an hour past, feasting her eyes on all the assembled riches but not buying so much as a yard of calico.
ENGLISH   They were her mother\'s.\"  In point of fact, there was a general uprising against Denise.
FRENCH    Un vent froid qui soufflait, avait déjà séché le pavé.
FRENCH   J\'attends Mme Marty pour des flanelles.
FRENCH   Des clientes connues vinrent au rayon, Mme Aurélie l\'appela plusieurs fois, lui jeta sur les épaules des manteaux, afin qu\'elle en fit valoir les coupes nouvelles.
FRENCH    Mais les souffrances de Mouret devaient grandir.
FRENCH   Pourquoi donc n\'avait-elle pas un amant? cela étonnait, semblait ridicule.
ENGLISH    \"I know it, I know it, madame,\" repeated Bourdoncle, quietly.
FRENCH   On parlait d\'agrandissements considérables, de magasins gigantesques tenant les trois façades des rues de la Michodière, Neuve-Saint-Augustin et Monsigny.
ENGLISH   And then, with the impetuosity of a child, she threw herself on his neck, sobbing also, and stammering: \"Oh! Monsieur Mouret, it\'s you I love!\"  A last murmur was rising from The Ladies\' Paradise, the distant acclamation of a multitude.
ENGLISH       CHAPTER XIV.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle marchait toujours à petits pas.
ENGLISH   Mouret, on making his daily round with Bourdoncle, would call aside the managers, whom he had prompted during the winter to engage more men than were really necessary, in order that the business might not suffer; but it was now a question of reducing expenses and this was effected by casting quite a third of the shop people--the weak ones who allowed themselves to be swallowed up by the strong ones--on to the pavements again.
ENGLISH    In the first place, at the corset counter a little scene was collecting quite a crowd.
FRENCH   Même la direction aimait mieux faire le plus de silence possible autour de ces vols, jugeant inutile de mettre la police sur pied, ce qui aurait étalé une des plaies fatales des grands bazars.
FRENCH   Puisque les magasins baissaient les prix, il n\'y avait qu\'à attendre.
FRENCH   Et elle avait passé une heure aux modes, installée dans un salon neuf du premier étage, faisant vider les armoires, prenant les chapeaux sur les champignons de palissandre qui garnissaient deux tables, les essayant tous, à elle et à sa fille, les chapeaux blancs, les capotes blanches, les toques blanches.
FRENCH    Du coup, la première acheva de paralyser Denise, en allant lui dire à demi-voix:  -- Vous voyez bien que vous ne savez pas.
FRENCH   Seulement, je dis ma pensée.
FRENCH   Elle est conclue, si votre vente de lundi prend l\'importance que vous dites.
FRENCH    Après le fromage, la bonne venait de servir des confitures et des poires.
ENGLISH   Both lived in the same lodging-house, the Hôtel de Smyrne, in the Rue Sainte-Anne, a murky building entirely inhabited by shop assistants.
FRENCH    Jouve s\'était éloigné, en feignant de ne pas les voir; et elles l\'entendirent qui tombait sur un vendeur des dentelles, coupable de regarder un cheval abattu, dans la rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin.
ENGLISH    No, he said nothing, he could find nothing to say.
FRENCH   Puis, nous sommes ici à plus de cinq cents mètres, tandis que Vabre se trouvait porte à porte avec l\'autre.
ENGLISH   The emperor with all his cannon could not turn me out.\"  Denise did not dare to say any more, but went on with her work, whilst the old man continued to vent short sentences, between two cuts of his knife; now muttering something to the effect that the game had hardly begun; and then that they would see wonderful things later on, for he had certain plans which would sweep their umbrella counter away; and, deeply blended with his obstinacy, you detected the personal revolt of the skilled manufacturer against the growing invasion of commonplace rubbish.
ENGLISH   As she was well pleased with her cook, she wanted to make her a present of a dress.
FRENCH   Clara eut un geste vexé, en regardant Marguerite, comme pour prédire que la nouvelle vendeuse n\'aurait pas beaucoup d\'agrément au rayon.
ENGLISH   Upon my word, I should be ashamed to use such means! The Old Elbeuf has been known for nearly a hundred years, and has no need of any such catchpenny devices at its door.
FRENCH   Je cède à la force...
ENGLISH    With the letter lying on her lap and her heart beating violently she remained with her eyes fixed on the blinding light which came in by one of the windows.
FRENCH   Mais Denise avait eu le temps d\'intervenir, et il ferma la bouche de Bourdoncle au nom des intérêts mêmes de la maison.
ENGLISH   At last he ended by prophesying that young Albert would swallow up the Rambouillet property later on with a lot of actresses.
FRENCH   Elles causaient toilette, Mme de Boves racontait une robe de bal.
ENGLISH   They were in the Saint-Augustin Hall, which they were greatly surprised to find almost empty.
ENGLISH   When Madame Baudu and Geneviève returned, they remarked how quiet he was, and Denise assured them that he never made any more noise than that, but remained for days together without speaking, living solely on kisses and caresses.
FRENCH   Dans cet accablement, toute la famille d\'ailleurs, les yeux vagues, continuait à remuer les amertumes de son histoire.
ENGLISH    He would begin by stopping in the basement opposite the shoot.
FRENCH    Il la suivit dans la pièce voisine.
FRENCH   Ah! il était méchant, il la frappait ainsi que les autres! Et il y avait en elle comme un déchirement, un dernier lien qui se rompait.
FRENCH   Il faudrait bien qu\'elle succombât un jour.
FRENCH   Robineau, atterré, hors d\'haleine, s\'arrêta de même à cinq francs, ne trouvant pas le courage de descendre davantage.
FRENCH    Il parla d\'autres commerçants, il passa le quartier en revue.
ENGLISH   \"And some people are fearfully jealous, you know! Only the other day there was a workman who pitched his wife into a well.\"  She kept her eyes on Denise, thinking she had guessed her trouble on seeing her turn pale.
FRENCH    C\'était Jean, en effet, Jean effaré qui arrivait pour dîner.
ENGLISH   \"Ah! I\'m not stout, am I? I used to be stouter, but it\'s all gone away.
ENGLISH   However, she did not reply; she continued to walk by his side with the same suffering air.
ENGLISH   But this wealth of goods rushing in to his establishment at the rate of thousands of francs each minute, made his clear eyes glisten.
ENGLISH   With a desponding look he was watching Denise and when she had crossed the threshold everything disappeared, a darkness came over the house.
ENGLISH   He now had them illustrated with engravings, and embellished with samples, gummed to the leaves.
ENGLISH   Though she had not the least wish to buy any, she even asked to see some grenadine and some Chambéry gauze.
ENGLISH   The palace was built, the temple raised to the extravagant folly of fashion.
FRENCH   Du reste, j\'aurais pu mourir, vous n\'en auriez rien su.
FRENCH    -- Chut! Mme Aurélie! murmura-t-elle.
ENGLISH   Still, he had got to like the business, and had even learned to carve.
FRENCH   Évidemment, ces demoiselles avaient flairé la vendeuse qui venait se présenter, et elles la dévisageaient, elles la déshabillaient du coin de l\'oeil, sans bienveillance, avec la sourde hostilité des gens à table qui n\'aiment pas se serrer pour faire place aux faims du dehors.
FRENCH    -- Eh oui! elle a des amants ici même.
FRENCH   Quand elle put se hasarder entre les roues, elle traversa la place Gaillon, comme si elle avait voulu gagner la rue Louis-le-Grand; puis, elle se ravisa, descendit vers la rue Saint-Roch.
FRENCH   Et lui, au milieu de cet effarement, gardait une gaieté triomphante, une certitude des millions, en homme adoré des femmes, et qui ne peut être trahi.
FRENCH    Alors, très intéressé, le baron l\'encouragea d\'un signe de tête.
ENGLISH   They never had had any luck.
FRENCH    Le timbre de l\'antichambre avait retenti.
FRENCH    Et, comme tous étaient assis déjà dans l\'étroite salle à manger, derrière la boutique, il appela le premier commis qui s\'attardait.
FRENCH    Alors, Mme Baudu et Geneviève comprirent, sur un regard, qu\'elles pouvaient arranger les choses.
FRENCH   Peut-être la première avait-elle témoigné autrefois trop de maternité à un ami de son fils, seulement elle occupait aujourd\'hui, dans les nouveautés, une situation de femme sérieuse, qui ne s\'amusait plus à de pareils enfantillages.
FRENCH   Il se montra d\'abord très tolérant, il permettait à sa nièce d\'avoir une opinion différente.
FRENCH   Au-dessus d\'elle, s\'abandonnant à ses soins, Mme Desforges avait le visage dur d\'une maîtresse difficile à contenter.
FRENCH   Certainement, le patron devenait fou, personne ne comprenait, c\'était une consternation générale.
ENGLISH    Along the corridor conducting to the bed-rooms reigned a barrack-like promiscuity--the girls, who were often not very tidy, would gossip there over dirty water and dirty linen, break into frequent quarrels and patch up continual reconciliations.
FRENCH   Lorsqu\'elle se retourna, leurs regards se rencontrèrent.
ENGLISH    Throughout the remaining week which Denise was obliged to spend in the house, Mouret preserved his rigid pallor.
ENGLISH   Whilst they supposed him to be inspecting the stud at Saint-Lô, he was squandering his last resources with her in a little house at Versailles.
ENGLISH   The matter was becoming a perfect nightmare; any one else but Denise speaking in favour of Bourras would have run the risk of immediate dismissal, so violently was Mouret tortured by the sickly desire to kick the old hovel down.
ENGLISH   Around the columns, covered with red velvet, spirals of white lace ascended; and from one to the other end of the department hung festoons of guipure, whilst on the counters were quantities of large cards, wound round with Valenciennes, Malines, and hand-made point.
ENGLISH   Then, as he gradually became intoxicated, he fell foul of Robineau, that fool of a second-hand who affected to keep himself apart, to such a point that he refused to walk down the street with one of his salesmen.
ENGLISH   Besides, you looked so down-hearted to-night at table.\"  Denise thanked her, and, touched by her good-natured air invited her to sit down.
ENGLISH   Having remarked that the old-fashioned goods, the dead stock, went off the more rapidly the higher the commission allowed to the employees, he had based on this observation quite a new system, that of interesting his people in the sale of all the goods, giving them a commission on even the smallest piece of stuff, the most trumpery article they sold.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! reprit Clara, ce serait drôle de l\'enlever alors!...
FRENCH   Oui, une personne du Bonheur, et très bien informée...
FRENCH    Elle se retourna, elle reconnut le grand garçon blême et dégingandé, qui lui avait adressé la parole, le matin.
FRENCH   Mon intérêt n\'est pas de vendre.
FRENCH   Les enfants étaient élevés, la fortune venait, lorsque brusquement la concurrence apportait la ruine.
FRENCH    Mais, au moment où ces dames allaient s\'éloigner, elles entendirent deux vendeurs qui plaisantaient sur les violettes.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! good heavens!\" he exclaimed, \"you are crying, mademoiselle, you are crying! Have I offended you?\"  \"No, no,\" she murmured.
FRENCH   Lorsqu\'il ne bougeait pas, il ne sentait que le plomb brûlant de ses jambes.
FRENCH    Justement, Mouret se trouvait en proie à une crise d\'inspiration.
FRENCH   Il a dû mettre tous ses bénéfices dans ses folies d\'agrandissement et de réclame.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! the scoundrels,\" growled Bourras, \"they won\'t even let her be carried away!\"  The hearse, which was at last approaching, had just come into collision with one of The Paradise vans, which at the rapid trot of two superb horses went spinning along shedding in the mist the starry radiance of its shining panels.
FRENCH    Elle avait peur de lui, elle dépêcha son travail si vite, qu\'il fut embarrassé pour lui en donner d\'autre, C\'étaient des lés de soie à coudre, des dentelles à réparer.
ENGLISH   She had just obtained this menial situation as a great favour, and she wore a long black blouse, marked on the shoulder with a number in yellow wool.
FRENCH   Il tenait un commerce de cannes et de parapluies, faisait les raccommodages, sculptait même des manches, ce qui lui avait conquis une célébrité d\'artiste dans le quartier.
ENGLISH   Early in the morning all the employees were at their posts, as on a week-day, and the work began with closed doors, not a customer was admitted.
FRENCH   Vous savez qu\'on va mettre la seconde à deux mille francs, ce qui lui fera près de sept mille, avec son intérêt.
FRENCH   Depuis qu\'elle n\'était plus, Octave lui gardait un souvenir attendri, se montrait reconnaissant à sa mémoire de la fortune dont elle l\'avait comblé en l\'épousant.
FRENCH   Quand il la reconnut, occupée à débarrasser une table d\'un tas énorme de vêtements, il courut la chercher.
FRENCH   Puis, elle était redescendue à la cordonnerie, au fond d\'une galerie du rez-de-chaussée, derrière les cravates, un comptoir ouvert de ce jour-là, dont elle avait bouleversé les vitrines, prise de désirs maladifs devant les mules de soie blanche garnies de cygne, les souliers et les bottines de satin blanc montés sur de grands talons Louis XV.
FRENCH    -- Ne le poussez pas, madame.
ENGLISH    On the following morning Baudu took Colomban to the further end of the store-room on the upper floor, having made up his mind over night as to what he would say to him.
FRENCH    Maintenant, tout le rayon s\'égayait, sans que la besogne en fût interrompue pourtant.
FRENCH   Vainement, on tâchait de le calmer: il semblait croire qu\'il se passait là-dedans des choses inconvenantes.
ENGLISH   Until that time they had lived on their former savings; but now they began to contract debts.
FRENCH   Depuis un an, Mme de Boves volait ainsi, ravagée d\'un besoin furieux, irrésistible.
FRENCH   Le coup fut rude pour Robineau, il ne croyait pas que son rival baisserait, car ces suicides de la concurrence, ces ventes à perte étaient encore sans exemple; et le flot des clientes, obéissant au bon marché, avait tout de suite reflué vers la rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, tandis que le magasin de la rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs se vidait.
FRENCH   Je ne sais comment vous dire...
FRENCH   Les paroles de Mouret sonnaient encore à ses oreilles.
FRENCH   Du reste, s\'il avait eu la folie de fermer le Bonheur, un autre grand magasin aurait poussé de lui- même à côté, car l\'idée soufflait des quatre points du ciel, le triomphe des cités ouvrières et industrielles était semé par le coup de vent du siècle, qui emportait l\'édifice croulant des vieux âges.
ENGLISH   However, Hutin, had an intimate--Liénard of the woollen department.
FRENCH   C\'était facile, on disait que toutes en arrivaient là, puisqu\'une femme, à Paris, ne pouvait vivre de son travail.
ENGLISH    That evening, Denise had made up her mind to play the part of bootmaker once more.
FRENCH   M.
FRENCH    Les regards de Geneviève se tournaient obstinément vers son père, qui demeurait debout, l\'air hébété, la gorge étranglée.
ENGLISH   The neighbourhood thought he would win the day, without, however, being sure of anything.
FRENCH   Puis, comme elle se plaignait en riant de n\'avoir plus que des hommes à son thé de quatre heures, il s\'oublia jusqu\'à lâcher cette phrase:  -- Je croyais trouver le baron Hartmann.
FRENCH    Celle-ci se leva, retourna au rayon, où des chuchotements l\'accueillirent.
FRENCH    -- En effet, madame, il est manqué, dit Mouret, pour couper court.
ENGLISH    \"Dear me,\" murmured he, \"what\'s the matter?\"  In a few words, Denise informed him.
FRENCH   Ça, c\'est le comble! Bourras est persuadé que le Mouret a voulu simplement le couler; car, enfin, à quoi ça rime-t-il, des parapluies avec des étoffes?...
FRENCH   Les deux frères, devenus roses, souriaient au patron de leur soeur.
ENGLISH   She interfered with a wounded air, and a majestic slowness of manner.
FRENCH    -- Oh! il les pincera, reprit Mouret, il connaît toutes leurs inventions.
FRENCH   Mais un grand succès s\'indiquait surtout pour le Paris-Bonheur, autour duquel grandissait une de ces poussées d\'engouement, dont la brusque fièvre décide d\'une mode en un jour.
ENGLISH   Did the striped vicuna suit the other day? I shall come and see you, and ask for my commission, mind.\"  But the girl ran off, laughing, and Liénard found himself before Madame Desforges, whom he could not help asking: \"What can I serve you with, madame?\"  She wanted a dress, not too dear but yet of strong stuff.
ENGLISH    She choose one at fourteen francs and a half; whereupon Madame Bourdelais, after watching the purchase with a look of censure, said to her amicably: \"You are wrong to be in such a hurry.
ENGLISH    \"But just look at the silk of this cloak!\" she resumed, \"one would really take it for so much cobweb.
ENGLISH   Then he had been obliged to mount the stairs, and cross a bridge and then go higher still, turning about amidst the longing looks of the employees of the linen, hosiery, and mercery departments, who gazed in ecstasy at this fortune travelling in the air.
FRENCH   Mme Marty et sa fille, emportées au plus haut, vagabondaient parmi les meubles.
ENGLISH   What was to be done? He had made up his mind to go into Bourdoncle\'s office, when he perceived Mouret crossing the gallery.
ENGLISH   You think me played out, don\'t you? and you feel hungry.
FRENCH    Et, tout en fignolant un oeil, il s\'adressait de nouveau à Denise.
ENGLISH   At night, between nine and one o\'clock, she could sew six dozen of these which represented thirty sous, out of which she had to deduct four sous for a candle.
FRENCH   Si le nom de votre oncle a suffi pour vous ouvrir notre maison, je veux croire que vous tiendrez ce que votre personne m\'a semblé promettre.
ENGLISH    \"Do you hear?\" she continued.
FRENCH   Un trait de génie que cette prime des ballons, distribuée à chaque acheteuse, des ballons rouges, à la fine peau de caoutchouc, portant en grosses lettres le nom du magasin, et qui, tenus au bout d\'un fil, voyageant en l\'air, promenaient par les rues une réclame vivante!  La grande puissance était surtout la publicité.
FRENCH   Celle-là n\'est pas encore née, mon bon.
ENGLISH   Although our marriage may be announced, they don\'t allow any kissing, the brutes!\"  Denise, greatly agitated, affected not to have seen them: and Baugé disappeared just as Deloche, also going the longest way round, in his turn appeared.
FRENCH    -- Mais, monsieur, je n\'ai pas entendu.
ENGLISH   As for myself, I assure you I don\'t care in the least, for I\'m quite sick of her.
ENGLISH   However, carriages were beginning to arrive, the sudden pulling up of the horses was heard, followed by the banging of the doors of the vehicles.
FRENCH    -- Si je voulais pourtant! dit-il d\'une voix ardente, en lui saisissant les mains.
FRENCH   Favier, servez donc Robineau à mademoiselle.
ENGLISH   Last month, whilst his wife supposed him to be at Perpignan, he was simply carrying on in Paris, in an out-of-the-way neighbourhood.\"  There ensued a pause.
FRENCH    -- Quoi donc? murmura-t-il, Albert est en faute?  Alors, selon son habitude, Mouret rentra en scène, pour jouer le rôle du bon prince.
FRENCH    1.F.4.
FRENCH    -- Je les entendais bien trouer le mur...
ENGLISH   Those who were plunged in the fiction of their newspaper, not even knowing what they were eating, remained silent.
FRENCH    -- Comment! il ne nous fait rien?...
FRENCH   Sans cesse, les queues se refaisaient, au milieu des appels des garçons, de la poussée des bêtes, qui, d\'elles-mêmes, serraient la file, tandis que des voitures nouvelles, continuellement, s\'ajoutaient aux autres.
FRENCH    Les commis entraient toujours.
FRENCH   L\'horizon tombait en poudre, n\'était plus qu\'un cadre dédaigné, jusqu\'aux hauteurs de Châtillon, jusqu\'à la vaste campagne, dont les lointains noyés indiquaient l\'esclavage.
FRENCH   Il finit par murmurer:  -- Il est de fait que ton diplôme de bachelier ne doit pas te servir à grand-chose pour vendre de la toile.
FRENCH   Je vous jure qu\'elle aura de mes nouvelles, si jamais elle tombe sous ma patte.
FRENCH   Pourtant, nous avons le même à dix-huit francs...
ENGLISH   It wasn\'t his fault if he was dying of hunger.
FRENCH   Que répondrait-elle s\'il s\'éveillait et s\'il demandait à manger? Cependant, elle n\'aurait eu qu\'à consentir.
FRENCH   unless a copyright notice is included.
FRENCH   Mouret l\'avait condamné, ennuyé sans doute maintenant de ce témoin qui le gênait pour rompre, las d\'une familiarité sans bénéfices.
ENGLISH   The white price-tickets now seemed but so many narrow lines, the piles of ribbon became quite squat, the promontory of flannel was but a thin partition barring the gallery; whilst the carpets and the embroidered silks which decked the balustrades hung down like processional banners suspended from the gallery of a church.
ENGLISH   Had it not been for the support of the buildings on either side it must have fallen; the slates of its roof were old and rotten, and its two-windowed front was cracked and covered with stains, running down in long rusty lines to the worm-eaten sign-board over the shop.
ENGLISH   \"Oh! his affair is serious.
ENGLISH   Each of his inspections became a massacre; as soon as he was seen a shudder of panic sped from counter to counter.
FRENCH    Une contraction légère passa sur le visage de Baudu: Il ne put s\'empêcher d\'intervenir, très poliment.
FRENCH    -- Oh! maman, disait Valentine, ce petit costume-là, s\'il est à ma taille!  Tout bas, Mme Guibal expliquait à Mme Marty sa tactique.
FRENCH   Dans le fonctionnement mécanique du Bonheur des Dames, cet escalier de la rue de la Michodière dégorgeait sans relâche les marchandises englouties par la glissoire de la rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, après qu\'elles avaient passé, en haut, à travers les engrenages des comptoirs.
FRENCH   N\'était-ce pas également sa faute, si le magasin causait de la lettre écrite par le patron? Il les entendait bien ricaner, avec des mots crus sur cette invitation, dont Liénard seul avait reçu la confidence; et il s\'accusait, il n\'aurait pas dû laisser parler Pauline devant ce dernier, il se rendait responsable de l\'indiscrétion commise.
FRENCH   Parfois, elle s\'animait, elle voyait l\'immense bazar idéal, le phalanstère du négoce, où chacun aurait sa part exacte des bénéfices, selon ses mérites, avec la certitude du lendemain, assurée à l\'aide d\'un contrat.
FRENCH   Et les saluts continuaient, on se rangeait sur le passage de Denise, Baugé s\'était précipité aux toiles pour lui sourire, comme à la bonne reine de la maison.
FRENCH   Puis, comme il reprochait à Pauline d\'avoir parlé devant Liénard, et que celle-ci demeurait embarrassée, la jeune fille eut enfin l\'explication des mots qu\'on chuchotait derrière elle, depuis le matin.
FRENCH    -- Si cette crapule parle, reprit Jean, le mari qui a un grand couteau...
ENGLISH   The Bon Marché was an excellent house, solid and respectable; but the Louvre certainly had a more showy class of customers.
ENGLISH   But she did not dare to scold him, so excited did he appear, bareheaded, out of breath through running all the way from the Faubourg du Temple.
FRENCH   Cependant, Denise l\'aimait beaucoup et se confiait à elle seule, au milieu du continuel galop des deux cents femmes que la maison occupait maintenant.
ENGLISH   They still resist.\"  The young man allowed a nervous gesture to escape him.
ENGLISH   Denise, well acquainted with his position, at last broke the silence by saying, in a voice of entreaty:  \"Pray don\'t stand out any longer, Monsieur Bourras.
FRENCH   Elle se taisait, torturée par cet interrogatoire.
FRENCH    Mais ce chagrin, le seul qu\'elle eût au-dehors, n\'altérait pas l\'humeur égale de Denise.
FRENCH   Mme Robineau elle-même, en voyant son mari songeur, approuvait du regard Denise, retombée modestement dans son silence.
FRENCH   Mais si ça presse trop, vous pouvez entrer.
ENGLISH   The cashier and his son rid themselves of their burdens.
FRENCH    Un instant, Denise resta immobile, les yeux perdus.
ENGLISH    Hutin thereupon began to laugh at her uneasy manner.
FRENCH   Puis, Mme Desforges, poussant une porte, passa dans le cabinet, où Mouret entra derrière elle.
ENGLISH   He had at last caught that Hutin in fault, that Hutin who was said to be Denise\'s sweetheart.
ENGLISH    Madame Baudu listened to him, her head flat on the pillow, and so pale that her face seemed the colour of the sheets.
FRENCH    Denise n\'était pas descendue à huit heures, avec les autres vendeuses.
FRENCH   Et chaque fois qu\'une voiture était pleine, il y avait, sur le pavé, un roulement sonore, dont tremblaient les petites boutiques voisines.
ENGLISH   It really grieves me to see him in that dark shop which no one ever enters.\"  \"He\'s not so badly off,\" replied Marguerite, \"he\'s going to marry the governor\'s daughter.\"  \"Oh! oh!\" resumed Clara, \"it would be good fun to flirt with him then! I\'ll try the game, on my word of honour!\"  And she continued in the same strain, happy to feel that Denise was shocked.
FRENCH    Le pauvre garçon haussait les épaules, ne répondait même pas.
FRENCH    -- Oui, oui, très bien...
FRENCH   Cette demoiselle, âgée de vingt-huit ans déjà, maigre et pâle, était une protégée de Mme Desforges, qui avait voulu la faire engager par Mouret comme vendeuse, en contant à celui-ci une histoire touchante: une orpheline, la dernière des Fontenailles, vieille noblesse du Poitou, débarquée sur le pavé de Paris avec un père ivrogne, restée honnête dans cette déchéance, d\'une éducation trop rudimentaire malheureusement pour être institutrice ou donner des leçons de piano.
FRENCH    -- Veuillez vous taire, je vous prie.
ENGLISH   In a few minutes, if she could only be valiant enough to crush her heart, she would be able to go away alone, and weep unseen.
FRENCH    Jouve alla chercher deux vendeuses des corsets.
ENGLISH   They both now understood why Madame Desforges had come to The Ladies\' Paradise notwithstanding the hostilities attending her rupture with Mouret.
ENGLISH   I have long wished to call and see you, but dared not do so.\"  He did make his confession, and related his debut in life, not even concealing the financial crisis through which he was passing in the midst of his triumph.
FRENCH   Jean, qui bâillait, était déjà retourné à la porte de la rue.
FRENCH   Mais ce silence même était comme un aveu de leurs secrètes préoccupations.
ENGLISH   His heavy breathing could be heard at a distance as he passed along, staggering and superb, amidst the respectful shopmen.
FRENCH   Lhomme parut, suivi des deux garçons, qui chancelaient; et, hors d\'haleine, il eut encore la force de crier:  -- Un million, deux cent quarante-sept francs, quatre-vingt-quinze centimes!  Enfin, c\'était le million, le million ramassé en un jour, le chiffre dont Mouret avait longtemps rêvé! Mais il eut un geste de colère, il dit avec impatience, de l\'air déçu d\'un homme dérangé dans son attente par un importun:  -- Un million, eh bien! mettez-le là.
ENGLISH   Now, however, she fell back.
FRENCH   Vous savez quelle estime j\'ai pour vous.
FRENCH   Il commença par les plaindre beaucoup de la perte de leur fille.
ENGLISH   But it is not so much the women, for to speak truly, I don\'t care a hang for them; the great thing in life is to be able to will and do--to create, in short.
FRENCH    Et elle le mettait chez lui, l\'installait en homme qui avait couché là, qui connaissait la place des peignes et des brosses.
FRENCH   Cette Denise, simple et douce, commençait à l\'inquiéter.
ENGLISH    They were now all hurrying along, with arms extended and plates held straight, for fear of running against one another.
FRENCH   Oui, j\'ai vu M.
FRENCH   Et la femme?  -- Elle mange un oncle, à présent, répondit Henriette, un vieux brave homme d\'oncle, qui s\'est retiré chez elle, après son veuvage...
ENGLISH   At this thought, a feeling of shame tortured her, an anguish with which she had never before been afflicted.
ENGLISH   Doesn\'t Paris belong to the women, and don\'t the women belong to us?\"  The baron laid his hands on Mouret\'s shoulders, looking at him with a paternal air.
FRENCH    Geneviève l\'interrompit.
FRENCH   Peu de rayons avaient eu des débuts plus modestes, et maintenant il débordait de vieux bronzes, de vieux ivoires, et de vieilles laques, il faisait quinze cent mille francs d\'affaires chaque année, il remuait tout l\'Extrême-Orient, où des voyageurs fouillaient pour lui les palais et les temples.
ENGLISH   Some people, whom these gratuitous treats rendered altogether unscrupulous, really made themselves ill.
FRENCH   Elle contenait vingt-deux couverts.
ENGLISH   What would you say if I were to add an ironmongery department to my cloth business? You would say I was mad, eh? Confess, at least, that you don\'t esteem them.\"  And as the young girl simply smiled, feeling uncomfortable and realizing how futile the best of reasons would be, he resumed: \"In short, you are on their side.
FRENCH   Des souffles ardents venaient de la rue, des reflets d\'or jaunissaient le plafond, baignaient d\'une lumière rousse les convives en nage.
ENGLISH    Mouret\'s unique passion was to conquer woman.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! he\'ll catch her!\" resumed Mouret; \"he knows all their tricks.\"  But his voice trembled and he laughed in an awkward manner.
FRENCH   On se dirait là-bas!  -- N\'est-ce pas, un vrai harem? Et pas cher!  -- Les Smyrne, ah! les Smyrne! quels tons, quelle finesse!  -- Et ce Kurdistan, voyez donc! un Delacroix!  Lentement, la foule diminuait.
FRENCH   Quand elle l\'eut interrogé d\'un mouvement de tête, il se pencha, il lui dit très bas:  -- C\'est pour ce manteau.
FRENCH   Vous la rallumerez ensuite.
FRENCH   Mais, ensuite, son dénuement devint complet.
FRENCH   Aux fenêtres, les stores tombaient, immobiles, sans un battement.
ENGLISH   7, where her box had already been placed.
ENGLISH   The seventy thousand francs, produced by the sale of their Rambouillet property, had in less than two years melted away in the abyss of competition.
ENGLISH   There was no need to trouble about Jean, as he was to enter on his apprenticeship the next day.
FRENCH   Le pis qui puisse lui arriver, c\'est de n\'être pas acceptée.
FRENCH    -- Écoutez donc, mademoiselle Fanny, disait-il.
FRENCH   Mais, comme Denise allait remettre à des vendeuses le foulard acheté par Mme Desforges, celle-ci parut se raviser et déclara que, décidément, elle prendrait un des manteaux de voyage, le gris clair; et Denise dut attendre complaisamment, pour la ramener aux confections.
FRENCH   Brusquement, il s\'était écrié qu\'il fallait «lui casser tout ça».
FRENCH   Mouret suivit le regard de la jeune fille, en tressaillant, car il avait cru entendre sa femme morte prononcer la phrase, une phrase à elle, qu\'il reconnaissait.
FRENCH   Mouret leva sa face mouillée de larmes, tous deux se regardèrent, leurs mains se tendirent, et il y eut une étreinte brusque, entre ces hommes qui avaient livré ensemble tant de batailles commerciales.
ENGLISH   During the thirteen hours of hard toil in the shop, there was no time for any display of affection between the salesmen and the saleswomen.
ENGLISH   A bottle containing some essence of verbena, which had been left uncorked inadvertently, emitted a vague expiring odour of fading flowers.
ENGLISH   Leaning against the wall was Deloche, stuffed with bread and digesting in silence, his eyes on the window.
ENGLISH   \"No, it fits well,\" she resumed.
ENGLISH   Then all at once she resigned herself, resumed her haughty bearing, and walked away by his side like a queen who deigns to accept the services of an aide-de-camp.
ENGLISH   The gnat was crushed; this was the final triumph over the galling obstinacy of the infinitely little; the whole block was now invaded and conquered.
FRENCH    -- Tu as raison, je suis un chenapan, cria-t-il.
ENGLISH   From behind the hoarding edging and obstructing the three streets, there issued a movement of feverish activity.
ENGLISH   \"We were distantly related.
ENGLISH    Since the end of August, Pauline had been married to Baugé; a most stupid affair, she would sometimes gaily remark.
FRENCH   Elle s\'assit en jupon, un vieux châle noué sur les épaules, près de Pauline en toilette; et une bonne causerie s\'engagea entre elles.
FRENCH    L\'histoire amusa ces dames.
FRENCH   Clara ne fut pas dupe de la manoeuvre: elle murmura qu\'on ferait mieux d\'aller chercher un lit tout de suite.
FRENCH   Il y a des choses à changer, d\'autres à prendre...
FRENCH   Mais on se montrait surtout, d\'un air d\'intérêt, les nouveaux commerçants atteints par la peste: le parfumeur Grognet, la modiste Mme Chadeuil, et Lacassagne le fleuriste, et Naud le cordonnier, encore debout, pris seulement de l\'anxiété du mal qui devait les balayer à leur tour.
FRENCH    -- J\'entends bien, répondit-il.
FRENCH   Eux-mêmes l\'avaient regardée, ce fut le dénouement muet, la fin commune des gros drames du coeur, un coup d\'oeil échangé dans la bousculade d\'une foule.
FRENCH    Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements.
FRENCH   Vrai! ce garçon était extraordinaire: un don de la vente, et une probité, une simplicité de moeurs, un ordre en toutes sortes, enfin mon élève...
FRENCH   Paul doit nous prendre vers quatre heures dans la salle de lecture, après sa sortie du ministère.
ENGLISH    \"So your father left you nothing,\" said he.
ENGLISH   Only the baron who knew her so well, remarked the slight contraction of her lips and the sombre fire which she had not been able to extinguish in the depths of her eyes.
ENGLISH   Mouret\'s idea, full of genius, had absolutely subjugated her and she paused in each fresh department.
FRENCH    -- Allons, vous n\'êtes pas plus raisonnable que les autres, déclara Bourdoncle, impatienté.
ENGLISH   They could now distinctly see it all, with its low and smoky ceiling, its oaken counters polished by use, and its old-fashioned nests of drawers with strong iron fittings.
FRENCH   Quant à Geneviève, elle surveillait avec une inquiétude croissante Colomban, qui, ne se croyant pas guetté, restait en extase, les regards levés sur les vendeuses des confections, dont on apercevait le comptoir, derrière les glaces de l\'entresol.
FRENCH    La vente, en effet, jetait son feu, dans un train d\'enfer, dont la maison tremblait, d\'une secousse de grand navire filant à pleine machine.
FRENCH    -- Allons donc! des manières! disait Favier.
ENGLISH   \"How kind you are! Had it not been for you I should have been turned away.
FRENCH   Alors, la lutte s\'engagea sur les prix.
FRENCH   Je ne puis venir à bout de mon petit monde.
FRENCH    -- Enfin, messieurs, dit Bouthemont, je ne peux rien prendre sur moi...
FRENCH   Dans la guerre sourde qu\'il continuait contre la jeune fille, il y avait d\'abord une antipathie de nature.
ENGLISH   However, the tide of customers, attracted by Mouret\'s cheapness, had immediately flown back towards the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, whilst the shop in the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs gradually emptied.
ENGLISH   It isn\'t any of our business.
FRENCH   Premièrement, ce va-et-vient continuel de clientes les disperse un peu partout, les multiplie et leur fait perdre la tête; secondement, comme il faut qu\'on les conduise d\'un bout des magasins à l\'autre, si elles désirent par exemple la doublure après avoir acheté la robe, ces voyages en tous sens triplent pour elle la grandeur de la maison; troisièmement, elles sont forcées de traverser des rayons où elles n\'auraient pas mis les pieds, des tentations les y accrochent au passage, et elles succombent; quatrièmement...
ENGLISH   Then, when all were lighted, there came a delighted murmur from the crowd, and the great show of white goods assumed a fairy splendour.
FRENCH   Elle s\'inquiète de me voir languir.
FRENCH   C\'était bien beau de ne pas lui avoir pris sa place.
FRENCH   Il ne pouvait pas laisser mourir le monde chez lui.
ENGLISH   It was not astonishing that their house should be falling about their heads.
ENGLISH   And this sea of faces, of many-coloured hats and bare heads, both dark and fair, rolled from one to the other end of the galleries, vague and discoloured amidst the glare of the stuffs.
ENGLISH   His trade moreover was diminishing to such a point that he sometimes remained without work.
FRENCH   Hein? c\'est gentil, c\'est ça qui doit faire courir le monde!  Mais Denise demeurait absorbée, devant l\'étalage de la porte centrale.
ENGLISH   Brutal thoughts came into his head, he could have struck Henriette.
FRENCH   De vieille famille bourgeoise, elle menait son ménage et ses trois enfants, avec une activité, une bonne grâce, un flair exquis de la vie pratique.
ENGLISH   \"I\'m furious.
FRENCH   Tant qu\'il ignorait, il n\'avait pas de reproches trop gros à se faire.
FRENCH    -- Taisez-vous! mesdemoiselles, vous feriez mieux de changer ces étiquettes...
FRENCH   C\'est pétri de vice...
FRENCH    -- Je vous disais donc que Robineau est de retour, continua-t-il, au milieu des rires et des conversations qui se croisaient.
FRENCH    Mouret, qu\'il rattrapa, criait en bas, dans le hall Saint- Augustin, en face de la porte d\'entrée:  -- Est-ce qu\'on se fiche de moi! J\'avais dit de mettre les ombrelles bleues en bordure...
ENGLISH   It was a mild night--damp, thawing weather--and in spite of the closed windows, and drawn curtains, one could hear the engines snorting on the opposite side of the way.
ENGLISH   But there, just because it\'s cheaper, it\'s not so good.\"  \"So it doesn\'t fit, the mantle you speak of?\" resumed Madame de Boves.
ENGLISH   Her bed was near one of the large windows which looked on to the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin.
ENGLISH   It appears that they are going to offer you eighty thousand francs to-morrow.\"  \"Eighty thousand francs!\" he interrupted, in a terrible voice; \"eighty thousand francs! Not for a million now!\"  She tried to reason with him.
ENGLISH   She had already placed some pins on the shoulders, the part that did not fit.
FRENCH    Puis, après un échange général de poignées de mains, elle demanda à Henriette:  -- Vous prenez donc une nouvelle femme de chambre?  -- Non, répondit celle-ci étonnée.
ENGLISH   Orders from all Europe were flowing in, a special post-office van was required for his correspondence; and yet she said no, always no.
FRENCH   Très vaniteuse, au point de ne pas vouloir être appelée de son nom de Lhomme qui la vexait, et de renier la loge de son père, dont elle parlait comme d\'un tailleur en boutique, elle n\'était bonne femme que pour les demoiselles souples et caressantes, tombant en admiration devant elle.
FRENCH   Pourquoi n\'allait- elle pas se présenter chez Robineau, où l\'on avait peut-être besoin de monde?  En septembre, Robineau s\'était décidé à acheter le fonds de Vinçard, tout en redoutant de compromettre les soixante mille francs de sa femme.
ENGLISH    \"They are chemises with running-strings,\" said Jean, who was delighted with the rising tide of feminine attire about him.
FRENCH   Pouvait-elle compter sur la place? elle recommençait à en douter, dans le malaise qui l\'avait empêchée de comprendre nettement.
FRENCH   À nu sur le bois, dans des cartons éventrés, hors des casiers trop pleins, une moisson de foulards mettait le rouge vif des géraniums, le blanc laiteux des pétunias, le jaune d\'or des chrysanthèmes, le bleu céleste des verveines; et, plus haut, sur des tiges de cuivre, s\'enguirlandait une autre floraison, des fichus jetés, des rubans déroulés, tout un cordon éclatant qui se prolongeait, montait autour des colonnes, se multipliait dans les glaces.
ENGLISH   In three years he had had a rise of six hundred francs, he was now receiving three thousand six hundred, barely enough to pay for his cigars.
ENGLISH   The great show of white was there triumphing in its most delicate and costly whiteness.
FRENCH    -- Vous avez une chambre, monsieur? demanda Denise, obéissant à une poussée instinctive.
ENGLISH   Thereupon Octave turned to his friend with such a significant twinkle of the eye that the latter added:  \"Not that one--at least not yet.
FRENCH    Puis, voyant une dame s\'approcher, il ajouta plus bas:  -- Attention! voilà pour vous.
FRENCH   C\'était une lutte sourde, où elles-mêmes apportaient une égale âpreté; et, dans leur fatigue commune, toujours sur pied, la chair morte, les sexes disparaissaient, il ne restait plus face à face que des intérêts contraires, irrités par la fièvre du négoce.
ENGLISH   What do they all complain of? We pay ready money and we take all they can make; it\'s strange if they can\'t work cheaper at that rate.
FRENCH    1.C.
ENGLISH   Then, as he blamed Pauline for having spoken before Liénard, and she stood there looking very embarrassed, Denise at last understood the meaning of the whispers she had heard around her all the morning.
FRENCH   Venez donc avec moi, vous avez le temps.
FRENCH   Il arrêta un passant.
FRENCH    Le soir même, comme Robineau rentrait chez lui, il reçut une lettre de la direction, l\'avertissant en quatre lignes que, pour des raisons d\'ordre intérieur, elle se voyait forcée de renoncer à ses services.
FRENCH    -- Mademoiselle Vadon! dit Hutin d\'une voix qui se fâchait, lorsqu\'il fut enfin dans le comptoir.
ENGLISH    He was beside himself with rage.
ENGLISH   In the first place, there ought always to be a crush at the entrance, so that the people in the street should mistake it for a riot; and he obtained this crush by placing a lot of bargains at the doors, shelves and baskets overflowing with low-priced articles; and so the common people crowded there, stopping up the doorway and making the shop look as if it were crammed with customers, when it was often only half full.
ENGLISH   An exhibition of silks, satins and velvets, in a supple, vibrating scale of colour, here set, as in full bloom, the most delicate hues of the floral world.
ENGLISH    On the day when Denise at last resolved to give him notice, Bourras had just returned from his lawyer\'s.
FRENCH   Et les fleurs montaient toujours, de grands lis mystiques, des branches de pommier printanières, des bottes de lilas embaumé, un épanouissement continu que surmontaient, à la hauteur du premier étage, des panaches de plumes d\'autruche, des plumes blanches qui étaient comme le souffle envolé de ce peuple de fleurs blanches.
ENGLISH   I may as well buy it here as anywhere else, mayn\'t I? Oh, I shan\'t spend another sou! in fact I don\'t want anything.\"  However, seized, carried away as it were, by the force of the crowd, they did not take their eyes off the door.
ENGLISH   What could that woman invent to torture her? And all his love, that love which surprised him even now, went forth to the girl like a support and a consolation.
ENGLISH   She made merry over the sudden gusts which blew up the table-cloth, and thought the arbour very funny in its bareness, with its freshly-painted trellis-work which cast a reflection on the cloth.
ENGLISH   Clara had disappeared a month before, and some said that she had altogether gone to the bad.
ENGLISH   In the fancy silks there are some charming lines, designs specially chosen from among thousands by our buyer; and in velvets you will find an exceedingly rich collection of shades.
FRENCH   Il avait conquis les mères elles-mêmes, il régnait sur toutes avec la brutalité d\'un despote, dont le caprice ruinait des ménages.
FRENCH   On était pourri de plâtre, on ne vendait plus rien, depuis que les voitures de matériaux barraient la rue.
ENGLISH   Then Vinçard, inflamed, raised his voice.
FRENCH   Alors, il se retira sans bruit; et, dans l\'escalier, ayant rencontré Bourdoncle et Jouve, il leur conta une histoire, un des extincteurs dont la porte semblait arrachée; de cette façon, ils monteraient, ils tomberaient sur les deux autres.
ENGLISH   It was Geneviève, who had just awoke, and was knocking with a stick they had left beside her.
FRENCH    -- Laissez donc! ils ne prennent que des vierges, et ils ont un confessionnal en permanence pour les vendeurs qui les regardent...
FRENCH   de Boves et Paul de Vallagnosc entrèrent.
ENGLISH   And thus when Madame Aurélie heard Madame Desforges she simply shrugged her shoulders, taking care not to interfere.
FRENCH   Derrière lui, Hutin se baissa, en disant:  -- Boeuf sauce piquante.
ENGLISH   \"I was waiting for you.
FRENCH    Alors, le lacet fut oublié, Mme Marty céda tout de suite, tandis que Mme de Boves refusait, préférant faire d\'abord le tour du rez- de-chaussée.
FRENCH    Cependant, l\'encombrement devenait tel à la soie, que Mme Desforges et Mme Marty ne purent d\'abord trouver un commis libre.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! cria Mme Marty, j\'y vais avec vous...
FRENCH    Il était moins facile d\'annoncer la nouvelle au vieux Bourras.
ENGLISH   Marguerite had resumed sharpening her pencil, the point of which was always breaking.
FRENCH    Colomban descendit une autre pièce.
FRENCH   Aidez-moi, mademoiselle.
FRENCH    L\'infirmerie était une longue pièce claire, où douze lits s\'alignaient, avec leurs rideaux blancs.
ENGLISH   Her Juno-like beauty, her tall majestic person was distorted by vulgar rage.
FRENCH   Marty, entré discrètement depuis quelques minutes, mettait son profil pauvre, une redingote étriquée et propre, un visage blêmi par le professorat, et que la conversation de ces dames sur la toilette achevait de bouleverser.
FRENCH   Hutin souriait, enchanté, approuvant d\'un regard amical; car, après avoir lui-même introduit jadis Bouthemont au Bonheur des Dames, pour en chasser Robineau, il le minait à son tour, dans le but obstiné de lui prendre sa place.
FRENCH   La soie surtout était en révolution, car on y pariait des choses chères.
FRENCH   Et, tranquillement, sur un pied d\'égalité charmante, il lui parla de ce dernier, auquel il rendait justice: un garçon d\'une intelligence vive, trop nerveux seulement.
FRENCH   Ces dames se séparaient, traversaient une dernière fois les comptoirs encombrés.
FRENCH   Une seule fenêtre ouvrait sur une petite cour intérieure, communiquant avec la rue par l\'allée noire de la maison; et cette cour, trempée, empestée, était comme un fond de puits, où tombait un rond de clarté louche.
FRENCH   Quand elle parla d\'une commandite pour son nouveau protégé; le baron, bien qu\'il ne s\'étonnât plus de rien, ne put réprimer un geste d\'effarement.
FRENCH    -- Moi! moi!...
FRENCH   C\'était comme une fleur de cave.
ENGLISH    Pauline was astonished.
ENGLISH   Yours wasn\'t such a fine shop.\"  Denise shook her head.
ENGLISH   For the last month she had avoided going out, for fear of bursting them altogether.
ENGLISH    Henriette observed with what pleasure Mouret shook hands with the new arrival.
FRENCH   On ne pouvait pas se retourner dans la boutique, tant c\'était petit...
FRENCH    Denise, qui avait écouté, suivit son oncle.
FRENCH    Mouret avait l\'unique passion de vaincre la femme.
FRENCH   Du reste, elle adorait son mari et ne vivait que de cet amour.
ENGLISH   The vast establishment displayed but the carcase of its usual appearance, the woodwork was absolutely bare, as on the day of taking possession.
FRENCH   Il posait en loi que pas un coin du Bonheur des Dames ne devait rester désert; partout, il exigeait du bruit, de la foule, de la vie; car la vie, disait- il, attire la vie, enfante et pullule.
FRENCH    -- C\'est comme moi, alors.
ENGLISH   As one must die, I would rather die of passion than boredom!\"  They both laughed, this reminded them of their old discussions at college.
ENGLISH   The million covered the whole table, crushing the papers and almost overturning the ink; and the gold and the silver and the copper running out of the sacks and bursting the leather bags, formed a great heap, the heap of the gross receipts, such as it came still warm and palpitating from the customers\' hands.
FRENCH   Puis, désignant de la cuiller Geneviève et Colomban:  -- Tiens! reprit-il, ces deux-là seront mariés au printemps, si la saison d\'hiver est bonne.
ENGLISH    Denise did not understand at first, and when she did, she withdrew her hands, looking very confused by what her friend had told her.
FRENCH    -- N\'est-ce pas? on en aurait mis la main au feu.
ENGLISH   I must.\"  Then he took her hands, and, in an outburst of tenderness, after the long coldness he had imposed on himself exclaimed: \"And if I asked you to marry me, Denise, would you still leave?\"  But she rapidly drew her hands away, struggling as if under the influence of a great grief.
ENGLISH   Tall, elegant, dressed with exquisite taste, she appeared to be very rich, and to belong to the best society.
FRENCH   Vous savez que c\'est à peine le prix d\'achat.
ENGLISH   Then he curtly replied that he granted her a week\'s reflection, before allowing her to commit such a stupid action.
FRENCH    Et, bouleversé, sortant de son rôle de directeur sermonnant une vendeuse coupable d\'une infraction au règlement, il se répandit en paroles violentes.
FRENCH   Il inventait des méfaits, il spéculait sur les plus légères négligences.
ENGLISH   Neither lowered more than a sou at a time now, for both lost considerable sums as often as they made this present to the public.
ENGLISH   At that time The Old Elbeuf, after sixty years\' trading, was already such as you see it now.
FRENCH   Les deux vendeurs regardaient vaguement dans les lointains du magasin.
FRENCH   Pas un bec de gaz ne brûlait, il n\'y avait que des lampes à huile, accrochées de loin en loin aux branches des lustres; et ces clartés éparses, pareilles à des taches jaunes, et dont la nuit mangeait les rayons, ressemblaient aux lanternes pendues dans des mines.
FRENCH    Elle oubliait l\'ordre que Mouret lui avait donné, le matin, de passer à son cabinet, après la vente.
FRENCH   Cependant, le corbillard n\'arrivait toujours pas, et Denise, très émue, regardait brûler les cierges, lorsqu\'elle tressaillit, au son connu d\'une voix qui parlait derrière elle.
FRENCH   C\'était le dénouement prévu de la grande bataille des deux soies rivales, le Paris-Bonheur avait écrasé la concurrence, à la suite d\'une nouvelle baisse de cinq centimes: il ne se vendait plus que quatre francs quatre-vingt-quinze, la soie de Gaujean avait trouvé son Waterloo.
FRENCH   Vous vous êtes peut-être rencontrés là-bas...
FRENCH    Ce fut le dernier coup porté à ces dames.
FRENCH   Ça me fait près de trois francs.
ENGLISH   Denise went up to inform Madame Cabin that she would endeavour to send for her box during the evening.
ENGLISH   The draper turned paler still, blinded by his tears.
FRENCH   Toutes les bourdes réussissaient auprès d\'elle, des aventures d\'amour extraordinaires, dont son ignorance de ces choses exagérait encore les périls.
ENGLISH   \"Just because we\'ve had a treat there is no reason why we should want too much of it.\"  Madame Baudu, the other shopman, and the young lady then came and took their places at table.
FRENCH    -- Soit! répondit Denise, souriante elle aussi.
ENGLISH   Where had she come from again? This time she couldn\'t say that she had been to the work-room.
ENGLISH   She ceased to protest, however, knowing that they required the strictest obedience, and prepared to wait until the first-hand should be good enough to let her sell, as she seemed at first to have the intention of doing.
FRENCH   Est-ce que c\'est Baudu qui vous envoie?  -- Oh! non, monsieur!  Et elle ne put s\'empêcher de rire, tant l\'idée lui parut singulière.
FRENCH   Quant à Deloche, longtemps il se contenta de sourire, en regardant Denise; puis, il s\'enhardit, lui murmura un mot d\'amitié, lorsqu\'il la coudoya.
ENGLISH   He\'s just lost his appeal case.
ENGLISH   She thought it so small, after the large, well-lighted rooms to which she had been accustomed in the country.
ENGLISH   What! it was that fellow she loved, that wretched salesman, the laughing-stock of his counter! It was the humblest, the most awkward of all that she preferred to him, the master! for he had seen them, she leaving her hand in his, and he covering that hand with kisses.
ENGLISH   They were now asking each other about Madame Marty; it was said that poor Monsieur Marty, after some violent scenes at home, had gone quite mad, believing himself endowed with unexhaustible wealth.
ENGLISH   However, on hearing Madame Aurélie knocking at her door, she at once left the drawing-room.
FRENCH   Le coup de génie de Mouret la tenait tout entière.
ENGLISH   One of them, on being drawn up, admitted a ray of sunshine which sped across the room and gilded the ceiling.
FRENCH   Il y avait près de trois ans que Mouret attendait ces travaux, d\'abord dans la prévision d\'un mouvement plus actif des affaires, ensuite avec des ambitions d\'agrandissement, qu\'il n\'osait avouer tout haut, tant son rêve s\'élargissait.
FRENCH   Dix pas plus loin, s\'ouvrait la buvette, un autre guichet, avec un comptoir d\'étain luisant, où étaient rangées les parts de vin, de petites bouteilles sans bouchon, encore humides du rinçage.
FRENCH   Hutin, qui, au contraire, était de l\'école classique de la symétrie et de la mélodie cherchées dans les nuances, le regardait allumer cet incendie d\'étoffes au milieu d\'une table, sans se permettre la moindre critique, mais les lèvres pincées par une moue d\'artiste dont une telle débauche blessait les convictions.
FRENCH    -- Ah! enfin! murmura Favier, lorsque le cuisinier de service reparut avec une bassine, où il piqua une cuisse pour la lui donner.
FRENCH   La guerre de la lingerie et des confections en prit une violence nouvelle, jamais elle n\'avait soufflé si rudement: des mots furent échangés, raides comme des balles, et il y eut même une gifle, un soir, derrière les cartons de chemises.
ENGLISH   Her appointment as first-hand had destroyed the last resistance.
FRENCH   Ce fut pour elle une secousse; elle rougit, elle se sentit reprise de son étrange peur, en croyant qu\'il allait lui parler.
FRENCH   Moi, à votre place...
FRENCH   Certainement, c\'était ridicule; mais elle sentait ainsi, elle ne pouvait se refaire.
FRENCH   Mme Baudu n\'intervenait plus, immobile sur sa chaise; Geneviève et Colomban, les yeux baissés, ramassaient et mangeaient par distraction des miettes de pain.
FRENCH   Huit heures sonnaient à Saint-Roch, il n\'y avait sur les trottoirs que le Paris matinal, les employés filant à leurs bureaux et les ménagères courant les boutiques.
FRENCH    Cependant, comme elle traversait les foulards et la ganterie, son coeur défaillit de nouveau.
ENGLISH   But the conversation took another turn, for one of the girls was giving a recipe for cleaning velvet.
FRENCH    Alors, Denise fut honteuse.
FRENCH   Elle avait passé deux ans là-bas, chez Cornaille, le premier marchand de nouveautés de la ville; et ce magasin, rencontré brusquement, cette maison énorme pour elle, lui gonflait le coeur, la retenait, émue, intéressée, oublieuse du reste.
FRENCH   Le comte, qui affectait de faire visiter au jeune homme les nouveaux magasins, échangea avec elle un vif regard; puis, elle se replongea dans sa lecture, comme si elle ne l\'avait pas aperçu.
ENGLISH   What will it be inside?\"  Caught by the current the ladies could not now go back.
FRENCH    Et il continuait à la regarder.
ENGLISH   \"Here\'s the second-hand, madame.
ENGLISH   Patience!\"  The members of the family evidently kept back the flood of rancour rising in their throats.
ENGLISH   All her sensations--her anxious entry, her relatives\' cold reception, the dull lunch partaken of in a prison-like atmosphere, her spell of waiting amidst the sleepy solitude of this old establishment doomed to speedy decay--all these became concentrated in mute protest, in a passionate longing for life and light.
ENGLISH     The Rue du Dix-Décembre, quite new with its chalk-white houses and the last remaining scaffoldings of a few unfinished buildings, stretched out beneath a clear February sun; a stream of vehicles was passing at a conquering pace through this gap of light, intersecting the damp gloom of the old Saint-Roch quarter; and, between the Rue de la Michodière and the Rue de Choiseul, there was quite a tumult, the crush of a crowd of people who had been excited by a month\'s advertising, and with their eyes in the air, were gaping at the monumental façade of The Ladies\' Paradise, inaugurated that Monday, on the occasion of a grand display of white goods.
ENGLISH   The clear morning light outlined the dark silhouettes of their mourning clothes; and an oblique ray of sunshine gilded their fair hair.
ENGLISH   The cellar filled with the soft glimmer of satin and the whiteness of linen, a prodigious unpacking in which furs were mingled with lace, French fancy goods with Eastern hangings.
FRENCH   Si je peux, je t\'enverrai les quinze francs tout de même.
FRENCH   Mais celle-ci, depuis sa rentrée, avait conquis peu à peu le rayon; elle y était chez elle à présent, et la première lui reconnaissait même des qualités rares de vendeuse, la douceur obstinée, la conviction souriante.
ENGLISH   And each time a van was loaded, there came a sonorous roll over the paving stones which made all the little neighbouring shops tremble.
FRENCH   Alors, il déclara qu\'il n\'était même plus le maître d\'empêcher les choses, Bourdoncle s\'en occupait, car le conseil avait résolu d\'en finir.
FRENCH   Elle cherchait le manteau demandé, lorsqu\'elle eut un léger cri de surprise.
FRENCH   Ils en oubliaient le riz au gratin, où un caissier venait de trouver un bouton de culotte.
FRENCH   La tête basse, comme sourd, il ne semblait pas entendre les plaisanteries, il éprouvait un regret désespéré de ce qu\'il venait de faire.
FRENCH   Elle se hâta de traverser le hall.
ENGLISH    \"Last year was very disastrous,\" explained Baudu, \"and we have been obliged to postpone the marriage.
ENGLISH   They shook hands, and he at once inquired:  \"Has Madame de Boves done us the honour of coming?\"  \"Well, no,\" replied the husband, \"and she very much regrets it.
ENGLISH   And then she got up quickly for her uncle was calling her.
ENGLISH   \"However, one\'s bound to come to that.\"  The countess darted a quick glance at her new friend.
ENGLISH   In the centre, starting from the grand entrance, a large gallery ran from end to end, flanked right and left by two narrower ones, the Monsigny Gallery and the Michodière Gallery.
FRENCH   Madame en sera contente.
ENGLISH   She had just mentioned Albert Lhomme\'s name.
ENGLISH   I\'m afraid to stay alone.\"  Then, when Baudu reached the little dismal room, where he spent long hours seated on a chair, she assumed an air of gaiety, saying to Denise--\"Don\'t come to-morrow, I would rather not.
FRENCH    -- Je vous accompagne, dit Mme de Boves.
ENGLISH   The sun was already warming the streets and the glorious May morning seemed to be smiling on the pavements.
ENGLISH   She also pretended to be surprised.
FRENCH   Et les confections étaient là, dans cette chapelle élevée au culte des grâces de la femme: occupant le centre, un article hors ligne, un manteau de velours, avec des garnitures de renard argenté; d\'un côté, une rotonde de soie, doublée de petit-gris; de l\'autre, un paletot de drap, bordé de plumes de coq; enfin, des sorties de bal, en cachemire blanc, en matelassé blanc, garnies de cygne ou de chenille.
FRENCH   Les augmentations avaient lieu au lendemain de l\'inventaire; c\'était également l\'époque où, le chiffre d\'affaires réalisées pendant l\'année étant connu, les chefs de rayon touchaient leurs intérêts sur l\'augmentation de ce chiffre, comparé au chiffre de l\'année précédente.
ENGLISH    \"Well, Bourdoncle!\" cried out Mouret, \"are you trembling still?\"  He had returned to his favourite position against the balustrade, at the top of the stairs, and, in presence of the massacre of stuffs spread out below him, he indulged in a victorious laugh.
FRENCH   Et la jeune fille ayant répondu qu\'elle n\'avait pas cherché de place, qu\'elle comptait se reposer d\'abord un mois à Valognes, grâce aux économies déjà faites par elle, il demanda ce qui l\'empêcherait de rentrer ensuite au Bonheur, si le soin de sa santé l\'obligeait seul à en sortir.
ENGLISH   It seems that I must suffer the insolence of your mistresses in my own house even! A creature you\'ve picked out of some gutter!\"  Two big tears gushed from Denise\'s eyes.
FRENCH   Cet effroi des gens prudents, autour de lui, l\'amusait.
ENGLISH   The advice of a woman, however humble she may be, is always worth listening to when she has a little intelligence.
FRENCH   Cela lui donna un prétexte pour s\'arrêter, et elle causa un instant, en cherchant une façon d\'amortir la terrible nouvelle.
ENGLISH    \"Ah!\" said Madame Guibal again stopping amidst all the jostling as she came to the first pay-desk, \"that\'s a pretty idea, those violets!\"  She referred to the new present made by The Ladies\' Paradise, one of Mouret\'s ideas, which was making a great noise in the newspapers: small bouquets of white violets, bought by the thousand at Nice were distributed to every lady customer who made the smallest purchase.
FRENCH   Alors, Denise, intimidée par la pensée qu\'elles guettaient son début, tailla son crayon, afin d\'avoir une contenance; puis, imitant les autres, elle se l\'enfonça dans la poitrine, entre deux boutonnières.
ENGLISH   Vanpouille Brothers, the furriers, cannot hold out much longer.
FRENCH   Mais le beau Mignot, lorsqu\'il apprit l\'envoi de la lettre, eut une réflexion si grossière, que Bouthemont se vit forcé d\'intervenir.
ENGLISH   She must have noticed the young girl\'s red eyes, for she was stealthily examining her.
FRENCH   Et, dans l\'énervement de son impuissance, ses larmes coulèrent.
ENGLISH    \"My God!\" the old man had exclaimed as if the blow had resounded in his very entrails.
FRENCH   Puis, le banquier déclara:  -- Eh bien! j\'examinerai l\'affaire...
ENGLISH   The poor girl had not lied; it was really her brother.
FRENCH   Mais, de la clientèle entassée, de cette mer de corsages gonflés de vie, battant de désirs, tout fleuris de bouquets de violettes, comme pour les noces populaires de quelque souveraine, il finit par ne plus distinguer que le corsage nu de Mme Desforges, qui s\'était arrêtée à la ganterie avec Mme Guibal.
ENGLISH   My brothers are to be at my uncle\'s to-night, and I have promised to dine with them.\"  \"But your foot! You walk with such difficulty.\"  \"Oh, I can get so far very well.
FRENCH   Leurs misères et leurs vices venaient de là.
ENGLISH   I shall buy my braid and be off.\"  \"I will go with you,\" said Madame de Boves.
FRENCH    -- Non, j\'ai trop soif, laissez-moi.
ENGLISH   Those who did not wish to go home to their families were nursed there.
FRENCH   Comme la rue du Dix-Décembre devait couper la rue de Choiseul et la rue de la Michodière, il voyait le Bonheur des Dames envahir tout le pâté entouré par ces rues et la rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, il l\'imaginait déjà avec une façade de palais sur la voie nouvelle, dominateur, maître de la ville conquise.
ENGLISH   It came on her as a surprise.
FRENCH   Elle le reçut debout.
ENGLISH    \"Nothing,\" she stammered, \"but it\'s rather warm here.\"  However Hutin\'s table was close to theirs, and when Hutin perceived Baugé, whom he knew, he commenced a conversation in a shrill voice, in order to attract further attention.
ENGLISH   Then there was a laugh at poor Deloche\'s ill-luck.
FRENCH   Les vendeurs, assourdis, brisés, n\'étaient plus que leurs choses, dont elles disposaient avec une tyrannie de souveraines.
ENGLISH   The war between the two departments became more violent than ever, it had never waxed so warm; angry words were exchanged like cannon shots, and a slap even was given one evening behind some boxes of chemises.
FRENCH   Denise était venue à pied de la gare Saint-Lazare, où un train de Cherbourg l\'avait débarquée avec ses deux frères, après une nuit passée sur la dure banquette d\'un wagon de troisième classe.
FRENCH   On l\'apporte, ne vous inquiétez pas, je vous en prie.
FRENCH   Les soixante-dix mille francs, produits par la vente de la propriété de Rambouillet, s\'étaient fondus en moins de deux ans dans le gouffre de la concurrence.
FRENCH    -- Mais pourquoi cherchez-vous à ménager l\'oeil? dit-il.
FRENCH    -- Fi! l\'horreur! cria Mme de Boves.
FRENCH   Elle avait conquis une autorité absolue, par sa douceur même.
ENGLISH   So they wandered about the fields all the afternoon.
FRENCH   Mais regarde-le donc! est-il comique, à la magnétiser du coin de l\'oeil! La vieille France, mon cher!...
ENGLISH   Bédoré, accompanying his sister, leant on his cane, so full of worry and anxiety that his liver complaint was getting worse every day.
FRENCH    En effet, cette absence prolongée commençait à gêner tout le monde.
ENGLISH   \"You are still in Paris?\" he inquired.
FRENCH   Il passait les heures, au fond de cette solitude, sans que personne souvent le dérangeât de la journée, effaré et ne trouvant plus les marchandises, lorsqu\'une cliente se risquait encore.
ENGLISH    \"Really,\" said Madame Bourdelais at last, \"you must treat me better for otherwise I shall go opposite, like the others.\"  Thereupon he lost his head, and, shaking with all the passion he had restrained, cried out: \"Well! go opposite then!\"  At this she got up, greatly wounded, and went off without turning round, but saying: \"That\'s just what I am going to do, sir.\"  A general stupor ensued.
ENGLISH   She went and turned the winch, whose wheels gave out a plaintive cry whilst the sheets of iron slowly descended, like the heavy draperies of a curtain falling on the catastrophe of a fifth act.
FRENCH   S\'il n\'osait plus y toucher, il la trouvait diablement jolie.
FRENCH   Puis, quand elle eut terminé, il secoua la tête.
ENGLISH   Madame Marty replaced her lace in her little bag and Madame de Boves ate another sponge cake, whilst Henriette who had risen began talking in a low tone to the baron, near one of the windows.
FRENCH    1.E.8.
ENGLISH   You hear, Denise, I\'ve got over seventy thousand francs there, which will certainly make your Mouret spend some sleepless nights.
FRENCH    Maintenant, ils souriaient.
FRENCH    -- La maison, pas de danger!...
FRENCH   Pourtant, elle voulut s\'orienter.
ENGLISH   He laid it down as a law that not a corner of The Ladies\' Paradise ought to remain deserted; he required a noise, a crowd, evidence of life everywhere; for life, said he, attracts life, increases and multiplies it.
ENGLISH   Up above, they would shine in the window displays, set money galloping through the departments, no sooner shown than carried off, in the furious rush of business which traversed the place.
ENGLISH   Madame Cabin opened it by pulling a string and then gave a glance in order to see who was returning.
ENGLISH   Would you like me to stay?\"  \"No, thanks.
FRENCH   Une rouée, une fille de vice savant, n\'aurait pas agi d\'une autre façon que cette innocente.
ENGLISH   Then, as she laughingly complained that she now only had gentlemen at her four o\'clock tea, he so far forgot himself as to blurt out:  \"I expected to find Baron Hartmann here.\"  Henriette turned pale.
FRENCH    M.
FRENCH   Brusquement, il reparut en haut du grand escalier qui descendait au rez-de-chaussée; et, de là, il domina encore la maison entière.
FRENCH   La pensée de Denise lui avait brusquement serré la poitrine, cette pensée qui, sans relâche, le traversait d\'une flamme, comme l\'élancement d\'un mal inguérissable.
ENGLISH    \"Good luck!\" said Deloche.
FRENCH   Nous irons le voir après déjeuner.
FRENCH    Ce fut un étonnement.
FRENCH   Justement, il avait imaginé le coup ingénieux d\'acheter, pour ses confections, la soie chez son rival.
FRENCH    Et, questionnant une autre vendeuse, elle ajouta:  -- Est-ce qu\'elle n\'est pas à la réception?  -- Non, madame Frédéric, je ne crois pas, répondit celle-ci.
ENGLISH   However, they went forward quietly, without fear.
FRENCH   Les vendeuses s\'inscrivaient sur une ardoise, dans leur ordre d\'arrivée; et, chaque fois qu\'une d\'elles avait eu une cliente, elle remettait son nom à la queue.
ENGLISH   He sipped his tea between each sentence he uttered, protesting all the while that he was in despair.
ENGLISH   Mamma has questioned me several times, greatly alarmed to see me pining away.
FRENCH   Si l\'on tutoyait toutes les femmes qui viennent ici?  Mais Hutin se montrait songeur.
FRENCH    Ils sortirent et commencèrent leur inspection de l\'après-midi, au milieu des rayons encombrés de foule.
ENGLISH   He had turned paler than ever, his whole person expressive of the patient, resigned anguish of a powerless man, witnessing the reckless expenditure of his dearly earned salary.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s intolerable.
FRENCH   On assurait qu\'il allait entrer au Louvre.
FRENCH   Puis, sur le trottoir, quand elle eut retrouvé sa fille qu\'elle avait perdue, elle frissonna à l\'air vif, elle demeura effarée, dans le détraquement de cette névrose des grands bazars.
ENGLISH   If the old-fashioned small shops were dying out it was because they could not struggle against the low prices which the tickets guaranteed.
ENGLISH   At the expiration of the week, when she returned to the subject, and expressed a determination to go away after the great sale, he did not lose his temper, but affected to talk the language of reason to her: she was playing with fortune, she would never find another position equal to that she was leaving.
FRENCH   La soirée coula triste et lente, animée uniquement par les pas de l\'onde, qui se promenait d\'un bout à l\'autre de la boutique vide.
ENGLISH   He came to give them an account of a last attempt to settle matters, an attempt moreover which had failed; the declaration of bankruptcy was unavoidable.
ENGLISH   And they came out victorious.
FRENCH    -- Pour que les clientes se tassent toutes dans le même coin, n\'est-ce pas? Une jolie idée de géomètre que j\'avais eue là! Je ne m\'en serais jamais consolé...
ENGLISH   \"You are wrong, sir, to agitate yourself in this way,\" she at last replied.
FRENCH   Et l\'appel des soies de fantaisie ne cessait pas, Favier, à demi-voix, fit alors remarquer que le stock serait joli: la direction allait être contente, cette grosse bête de Bouthemont était peut-être le premier acheteur de Paris, mais comme vendeur on n\'avait jamais vu un pareil sabot.
ENGLISH   And it was just this calm, serene patience which exasperated Madame Desforges the more.
ENGLISH    Vallagnosc indeed, despite the pleasure of this meeting, retained a tired and disenchanted air; and as his friend, somewhat astonished, insisted, saying: \"But you must do something.
ENGLISH   And they lingered there before their cups, the young ladies from the under-linen department all middle-class simplicity in their woollen dresses, and the young ladies from the mantle department arrayed in silk, their napkins tucked under their chins, in order not to stain their gowns, like ladies who might have come down to the servants\' hall to dine with their chamber-maids.
FRENCH    Elle était restée saisie, devant la violence de ce désespoir.
FRENCH   Cette dernière expliquait de son air tranquille de jolie femme pratique, qu\'elle avait voulu montrer ça aux petits.
FRENCH    X   Le premier dimanche d\'août, on faisait l\'inventaire, qui devait être terminé le soir même.
ENGLISH   He had been wonderfully lucky! A fellow who had come up from the South of France with the smiling audacity of an adventurer, who had no sooner arrived in Paris than he had begun to distinguish himself by all sorts of disgraceful pranks, figuring most prominently in a matrimonial scandal, which was still the talk of the neighbourhood; and who, to crown all, had suddenly and mysteriously made the conquest of Madame Hédouin, who had brought him The Ladies\' Paradise as a marriage portion.
ENGLISH    \"You\'ve heard the news?\" the umbrella dealer said to her one evening on her return from business.
FRENCH   Ah! tenez! je les veux à mes pieds, ou j\'y resterai, cette fois!  Mme Robineau, partageant cet enthousiasme, déclara la soie superbe.
FRENCH   Seulement, il fallait traverser tout le magasin.
ENGLISH   However, we have the same at eighteen francs; as for the mount, my dear madame, it\'s a shameful robbery.
FRENCH   Il n\'avouait pas, mais il rougissait, quand ces demoiselles des confections le plaisantaient; car l\'échantillonnage se trouvait dans une salle voisine du rayon, et elles l\'avaient remarqué rôdant sans cesse devant la porte.
FRENCH   Du reste, ces dames espéraient bien se retrouver en haut.
ENGLISH   For her indeed he was not a man; she utilized his services with the disdain she always showed for servants and did not even look at him.
FRENCH   Puis, Mignot, qui voulait ses vingt francs, alla se pencher à l\'oreille de Lhomme.
FRENCH   C\'était l\'oncle Baudu, avec sa face jaune, l\'air vieilli.
ENGLISH    Then Pauline insisted no further.
FRENCH   Au jour, elle se calma, une grande tristesse résignée la tenait les yeux ouverts, tournés vers la fenêtre dont les vitres s\'éclairaient.
FRENCH    Ils se serrèrent la main, et Mouret, l\'air ravi, se retira, car il dînait mal, quand il n\'allait pas, le soir, jeter un coup d\'oeil sur la recette du Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH   L\'intéressé, toujours correct, décida, au nom de la morale, qu\'on ne la ferait pas entrer, pour ne point forcer une mère à rougir devant sa fille.
FRENCH   Il l\'aimait donc? Brusquement, elle comprenait, elle sentait la flamme croissante du coup de désir dont il l\'enveloppait, depuis qu\'elle était de retour aux confections.
FRENCH   Elle se retourna et vit la porte se fermer avec lenteur.
FRENCH    Il continua, fut d\'une politesse respectueuse, à laquelle les vendeuses du Bonheur des Dames n\'étaient guère habituées de sa part.
FRENCH   Le bruit était assourdissant, des rires, des appels, des chocs de vaisselle; au vent des fenêtres, les bougies s\'effaraient et coulaient; tandis que des papillons de nuit battaient des ailes, dans l\'air chauffé par l\'odeur des viandes, et que traversaient de petits souffles glacés.
FRENCH    The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
ENGLISH   \"What makes you so fond of each other, eh?\"  Denise had again been seized with an uneasy feeling.
ENGLISH   She made very little stir but went straight ahead to her goal, overcoming all obstacles, and that simply and naturally, for her nature was one of unconquerable sweetness.
ENGLISH   \"They could then lay down the law, instead of submitting to it.\"  Gaujean, who had asked for another slice of mutton, was slowly chewing.
FRENCH    -- Moi, déclara Colomban, j\'ai reçu hier une commande de Mme Bourdelais.
FRENCH   Moi, je ne peux pas souffrir de retrouver ma robe sur les épaules de toutes les femmes.
FRENCH   D\'abord, votre place n\'est pas chez lui, sa maison est mal famée, il loue à des personnes...
ENGLISH   She could not do with less than thirty sous a day, including the rent, even by living on dry bread herself, in order to procure a bit of meat for the little one.
ENGLISH   Baudu followed the hearse with a heavy mechanical step, refusing by a sign the arm offered him by Jean, who walked alongside.
ENGLISH   Thus the salesmen\'s positions were gradually improved, the wholesale dismissals were replaced by a system of holidays granted during the dead seasons, and it was decided to found a sort of benefit club which would protect the employees against slack times and ensure them a pension.
FRENCH   Elle confia Mme Bourdelais à une de ses vendeuses, elle revint vers eux, dans un coin du rayon, qui heureusement se dégarnissait.
ENGLISH   What overcame her more than anything else was to feel her heart beating violently.
FRENCH   Trois mois plus tard, Lhomme avait cent vingt musiciens sous sa direction, le rêve de sa vie était réalisé.
ENGLISH   At last, Madame Aurélie turned round with a solemn air.
ENGLISH   But at last he had been altogether crushed by the swan-skin cloths and the flannels sold by his rival, an assortment that had not its equal in the market.
FRENCH   Tandis que M.
FRENCH   Elle lui apportait donc la moitié du magasin.
ENGLISH   The inside arrangements had been all changed: the bargains were now placed on the Rue du Dix-Décembre side, the silk department was in the centre, the glove department occupied the Saint-Augustin Hall at the far end; and, from the new grand vestibule, you beheld, on looking up, the bedding department which had been moved from one to the other end of the second floor.
ENGLISH   Will you speak to him first about it? Tell him he\'s cutting his own throat.
ENGLISH   The young woman is there.\"  Henriette at once raised her voice, so as to be heard; and all her jealous suffering found relief in these scornfully harsh words: \"She can wait!\"  \"Shall I show her into madame\'s dressing-room?\" asked the servant.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle who professed to hate all women, contented himself with encouraging the extravagance of the lady customers, feeling meantime the greatest disdain for the frivolity which led them to ruin themselves in stupid gewgaws.
FRENCH   Attendez-moi, nous nous en irons ensemble.
ENGLISH   She grew animated, citing examples, showing herself well up in the question and even expressing new and enlightened ideas.
FRENCH   Elle, toute pâle, s\'écria:  -- M.
ENGLISH    But if honour was saved on both sides, the situation was becoming fatal for Robineau.
ENGLISH   At last Mouret ventured as low as five francs; and his staff paled and shuddered at such a challenge to fortune.
ENGLISH   What would become of her if a catastrophe should throw them into the street, with a load of debts? It was his fault, he ought never to have touched her money.
ENGLISH   Now that the first-floor departments were growing animated, he was obliged to stand back to make way for the women who were coming up to the under-clothing and mantle departments; whilst, behind him, in the lace and the shawl departments, he heard shopmen and customers talking of large sums.
FRENCH    If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
FRENCH    Le soir, dans leur chambre, quand Mme Baudu questionna son mari sur le résultat de l\'entretien, celui-ci avait retrouvé son obstination à combattre en personne, jusqu\'au bout.
ENGLISH    Meanwhile Monsieur de Boves and Vallagnosc, who had gone on in front with Madame Guibal, reached the lace department, a luxurious room, surrounded by nests of carved oak drawers, which were constantly being opened and shut.
ENGLISH   There\'s nothing like striking the iron while it\'s hot.\"  Not a customer had come in to interrupt this family discussion; the shop remained dark and empty as before.
FRENCH   Les premiers jours, elle n\'osait lever la tête, gênée de le sentir autour d\'elle, avec sa crinière de vieux lion, son nez crochu et ses yeux perçants, sous les touffes raides de ses sourcils.
FRENCH    Et il tâcha de parler des fêtes données au roi de Prusse, depuis la veille à Paris.
FRENCH   Rendez-moi le service de me donner enfin une certitude...
ENGLISH    \"But why not? Are you still afraid of being made love to?\"  And thereupon Pauline laughed heartily.
FRENCH   Il ne resta bientôt plus que Denise et Pauline.
ENGLISH   She received him standing.
ENGLISH   The enormous sums squandered by Mouret in costly and stupid caprices, amused him as an excuse for the follies which he had formerly committed himself.
FRENCH   Vous savez que Gaujean m\'a positivement déclaré la guerre.
FRENCH    Non toujours, dans tous les comptoirs, dans les galeries de vente, dans les salles, dans les magasins entiers! Il allait de la soie à la draperie, du blanc aux dentelles; il montait les étages, s\'arrêtait sur les ponts volants, prolongeait son inspection avec une minutie maniaque et douloureuse.
FRENCH   Longtemps, elle marcha sans but, entre les troncs énormes, le sang au visage, la tête bourdonnante d\'idées confuses.
FRENCH   Toujours, il concluait à l\'inutilité de l\'effort, à l\'ennui des heures également vides, à la bêtise finale du monde.
FRENCH    Denise finit par ne plus répondre.
FRENCH   C\'était, sur leurs genoux, la caresse d\'un tissu miraculeux de finesse, où leurs mains coupables s\'attardaient.
ENGLISH   The round busts of the dummies filled out the stuff, the prominent hips exaggerating the slimness of the waists and the absent heads being replaced by large price-tickets pinned on the necks, whilst the mirrors, on each side of the window, reflected and multiplied all these forms, peopling the street, as it were, with beautiful women for sale, each bearing a price in big figures in lieu of a head.
ENGLISH   \"Tell me,\" he went on.
FRENCH   Souvent, il avait senti ce souffle du commerce nouveau, cette évolution dont parlait la jeune fille; et il se demandait, aux heures de vision nette, pourquoi vouloir résister à un courant d\'une telle énergie, qui emporterait tout.
FRENCH   Le dilettantisme financier du baron Hartmann, mettant de l\'argent dans les deux affaires, l\'énervait aussi.
ENGLISH   She sat down in her petticoat, with an old shawl over her shoulders, near Pauline in full dress; and an interesting gossip ensued.
ENGLISH   The funeral took place on a Saturday, a dark cloudy day, with a sooty sky hanging low above the shivering city.
FRENCH    -- Et vous achetez?  -- Oh! non, nous regardons.
FRENCH    Mais elle s\'affolait, dans une révolte terrifiée, à l\'approche de ce visage brûlant, dont elle sentait le souffle.
ENGLISH   However, Mouret, surprised to come upon Denise again, bent down to ask Madame Aurélie what that young person was doing there; and, when the first-hand replied that she was applying for a saleswoman\'s situation, Bourdoncle, with his disdain for women, seemed suffocated by such pretension.
ENGLISH   As soon as he opened the door, on the first floor, they heard a frightened, feeble voice crying: \"Oh, I don\'t like to be left alone.
FRENCH   L\'amant lui faisait peur, cette peur folle qui blêmit la femme à l\'approche du mâle.
FRENCH   Quand il arrivait près du lit, il gesticulait, penché vers sa femme; puis, de retour devant la fenêtre, il se taisait un instant, il écoutait la clameur du chantier.
ENGLISH   He had conceived the bold idea of beating The Ladies\' Paradise on its own ground by making certain concessions to modern luxury.
ENGLISH    In fact, Denise was now at the summit.
FRENCH   Mais voilà, c\'est justement parce qu\'il est moins cher, qu\'il est moins bien.
FRENCH    -- Alors, vous iriez, vous? demanda-t-elle.
FRENCH   Et il résistait à l\'invincible logique des faits, il préférait en mourir que de céder, pris de soudaines colères contre Denise, sentant bien qu\'elle était la revanche, craignant de tomber vaincu sur ses millions, brisé comme une paille par l\'éternel féminin, le jour où il l\'épouserait.
FRENCH   Ce fut ainsi que, près du salon de lecture, elles retrouvèrent Mme Bourdelais et ses trois enfants.
ENGLISH   Her former sufferings were still fresh in her mind, and her heart filled with pity every time she saw a new-comer with feet bruised and eyes dim with tears, dragging her misery along in her silk dress, amidst the spiteful persecution of the older hands.
ENGLISH   The shop-girls were not his style, he affected to despise them, boasting more than ever of his pretended adventures with the lady customers.
ENGLISH   On the day she had noticed Madame Aurélie\'s son giving a note to the young lady in the under-linen department, it precisely happened that Deloche was asking her if she had enjoyed her lunch, feeling a desire to say something, and unable to think of anything more amiable.
FRENCH   Pas encore, du moins...
FRENCH   On avait retiré les ardoises pourries, les plafonds s\'effondraient, les murs craquaient, et il restait là, sous les vieilles charpentes à nu, au milieu des décombres.
ENGLISH    The next day when Denise went up to the infirmary to see Pauline, who had been obliged to take to her bed on account of the blow she had received, the latter kissed her heartily on both cheeks.
ENGLISH    Denise, affected almost to tears, thought him greatly changed by worry.
ENGLISH    When on the following day, Denise went with Pépé to her uncle Baudu\'s, the street was blocked up by a line of carts discharging bricks outside the Hôtel Duvillard.
FRENCH    -- Ferme la fenêtre, si cela t\'amuse, répondit-il enfin.
ENGLISH   Denise was standing; there was indeed a leather-covered bench there, but a feeling of pride prevented her from sitting down on it.
FRENCH   Il croyait le voir diminuer, il craignait d\'être bu lui-même, de passer de l\'autre côté avec ses parapluies et ses cannes, tant la terrible mécanique ronflait à cette heure.
FRENCH    Denise n\'osait plus souffler.
FRENCH   Lui, très gêné, balbutia d\'abord, demanda de ses nouvelles, parla du Vieil Elbeuf.
ENGLISH   Had she not bled in it? Had she not been bruised, dismissed, overwhelmed with insults? Even now she was frightened, when she felt herself chosen by the logic of facts.
FRENCH   Dès la première heure, avant que les magasins fussent pleins, il se produisit sous le vestibule un écrasement tel, qu\'il fallut avoir recours aux sergents de ville, pour rétablir la circulation sur le trottoir.
ENGLISH   The silk arrived yesterday, I believe, and Bouthemont must be getting it in now.\"  Bourdoncle followed him.
ENGLISH   Hutin and Favier, however, were crowing in the silk department, as loudly as Clara and Marguerite in the other one.
FRENCH   De quelle manière déjouer la tactique de cette fausse ingénue? Il ne cherchait plus qu\'à pénétrer ses artifices, dans l\'espoir de les dévoiler au grand jour; certainement, elle commettrait quelque faute, il la surprendrait avec un de ses amants, et elle serait chassée de nouveau, la maison retrouverait enfin son beau fonctionnement de machine bien montée.
FRENCH   Non, non, tu ne me déranges pas...
FRENCH    -- Bonsoir, monsieur, murmura Denise, en continuant de monter, sans attendre.
ENGLISH   How she loved them! He walked on a step or two; then returned and whispered in her ear: \"Come to my office after business.
ENGLISH   He did not understand the alterations any more than the others did and followed the governor\'s movements with an anxious eye.
FRENCH   Vraiment, si vous avez voulu montrer ce dont vous êtes capable...
FRENCH   Elle recommençait à espérer, quand une dernière question la gêna.
ENGLISH   One never knows how these things get about!\"  When Deloche made up his mind to drink a glass of water everybody burst out laughing again.
FRENCH   Liénard, qui était de l\'équipe, ajouta:  -- Ce n\'est pas comme au Louvre...
ENGLISH   10, where young Albert was getting confused by all the demands for invoices with which he was besieged.
ENGLISH   However, whilst speaking, she did not take her eyes off the doors of the reading-room; and she appeared greatly relieved when Madame Bourdelais rejoined her children, to explain the photographs to them.
ENGLISH   In the distance, in the depths of the shop through which Lhomme had just slowly passed with the heavy gait of an overladen beast of burden, you could hear the uproar, the ripple of surprise and joy which this colossal sum had left behind it as it passed.
ENGLISH   \"For an utterly worthless girl! You can\'t know whom you are loving! So far I have not wished to hurt your feelings, I have often avoided answering your continual questions.
FRENCH   Me vois-tu joindre un rayon de casseroles à mon commerce de draps? Hein? tu dirais que je suis fou...
ENGLISH   When with a tranquil step she passed through the lofty portal of The Ladies\' Paradise and they saw her disappear in the crowd, they felt a sort of sudden wrench.
FRENCH   Et puis, je ne me souviens plus: je descendais la rue de la Michodière, j\'ai cru que les gens du Bonheur se fichaient de moi, cette grande gueuse de maison m\'écrasait...
ENGLISH   It was in vain that he talked of the rainy season, they could not overlook the considerable stock of fancy silks left on hand; and as Hutin was improving the occasion--undermining him with the governors with an increase of sly ferocity--he could feel the ground giving way beneath him.
ENGLISH   The two young men, their heads at the wicket, exchanged remarks about this phalansterian kitchen, in which the least important utensils, even the spits and larding pins, assumed gigantic proportions.
FRENCH    Mouret continuait à les regarder tous les trois.
FRENCH   Alors, elle perdit la tête, elle poussa une porte qui donnait sur le magasin, et qu\'on laissait ouverte, pour les rondes de surveillance.
ENGLISH   However, he had to obey.
FRENCH    Mais Denise tressaillit.
ENGLISH   \"Don\'t be afraid; blind the customers! This is the style.
ENGLISH    \"It is really very good,\" observed Bourdoncle.
ENGLISH   What! no one was serving her! it was unpardonable! He begged her to be indulgent, for really they did not know which way to turn.
ENGLISH   I\'ll speak to the cook.\" And thus Mignot\'s complaint was shelved.
FRENCH   Il est insupportable, ce soleil!  Favier, en train de se hausser pour atteindre une pièce, grogna sourdement:  -- S\'il est permis d\'enfermer le monde par ce temps superbe! Pas de danger qu\'il pleuve, un jour d\'inventaire!...
FRENCH    Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation  Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
FRENCH   Je vous mettrai chez vous, je vous assurerai une petite fortune.
ENGLISH   It was to Mouret that this idea had occurred.
ENGLISH   When he perceived Denise, he nearly gave way to a gesture of astonishment.
ENGLISH   If your uncle\'s name has sufficed to gain you admittance to our house, I at least trust that you will seek to justify the good opinion I formed of you from your appearance.
FRENCH    En entrant, elle avait aperçu le million sur le bureau, et l\'étalage de cet argent la blessait.
ENGLISH   No one will come.\"  Denise had not noticed the assistant.
ENGLISH   Yesterday we were driven very hard.\"  Bourdoncle expressed his satisfaction by a nod of the head.
FRENCH   Cependant, on étouffa le scandale.
ENGLISH   Thus, for this winter sale, after the heavy sums recently paid to the builders, the whole capital was exhausted and it once more became a question of victory or death.
FRENCH   Il s\'était enfui, il n\'avait pas trouvé un mot de satisfaction, craignant de montrer ses larmes, laissant derrière lui le dégoût du triomphe.
FRENCH   Il vous écoutera peut-être, puisqu\'il a de l\'amitié pour vous, et vous lui rendriez un véritable service.
FRENCH   Elle était retombée sur le lit, elle pleurait au souvenir de ses deux enfants, elle pleurait toujours sans avoir la force de se déchausser, ivre de fatigue et de tristesse.
ENGLISH    \"I\'m going to buy a branch of apple-blossom,\" resumed Madame Marty.
FRENCH    -- Votre tour est passé...
ENGLISH   \"You be quiet.
FRENCH   Il cria:  -- Comment! si je m\'amuse!...
ENGLISH   Ever since her son\'s dismissal, Madame Aurélie had been trembling, for she found the directors cooling towards her, and also observed the young woman\'s power increasing daily.
FRENCH   Deslignières crèvera d\'un coup de sang, Piot et Rivoire ont eu la jaunisse.
ENGLISH   It was, moreover, a painful evening.
FRENCH   Mais Denise avait levé les yeux, et elle se troubla davantage, quand elle reconnut le jeune homme qu\'elle prenait pour un chef de rayon.
ENGLISH   Ah! I\'ll bring them to my feet or give up for good!\"  Madame Robineau, sharing the enthusiasm, declared the silk superb, and even Denise herself thought they might succeed.
FRENCH   Mais, lorsqu\'elle fut devant la porte du cabinet, une tristesse désespérée l\'envahit de nouveau.
ENGLISH   But Denise, since her return, had gradually conquered the department, and now felt quite at home in it; the first-hand had even recognised that she possessed some rare and valuable qualities as a saleswoman--a stubborn sweetness, a smiling force of conviction.
FRENCH    De nouveau, ils se turent.
ENGLISH   You are very kind to me, and I\'m very much obliged to you.\"  \"I ought not to be kind,\" said he.
ENGLISH   Besides, by a wise instinct, he had, from the first bowed before him, obedient without a struggle.
ENGLISH   And he added that these affairs are as a rule hushed up, even as they are hushed up in Paris.
FRENCH    Quand Mouret l\'eut quittée, Denise rentra sous les marronniers, dans l\'ombre noire.
ENGLISH   And he, amid this ruin, when fear for the future came upon him, only trembled for his wife, who had been brought up in a happy, peaceful home, and would never be able to endure a life of poverty.
ENGLISH   And to think that he is not even happy after all!\"  Then as Denise remonstrated with her, assuring her that she was not so bad as all that, she again cut her short by suddenly throwing back the bed-clothes with the chaste gesture of a virgin who has nothing to conceal in death.
ENGLISH   You know how fond I am of him, you who have become our friend.\"  She stopped short, half choking, ready to burst into tears; and, in her emotion, she held out her hands to him.
FRENCH   Passait-il par hasard? quelqu\'autre surveillant, de planton à la porte, l\'avait-il averti? Elle fut prise d\'une telle crainte, qu\'elle perdit la tête; et elle poussa Jean hors du trou de ténèbres où ils se cachaient, le chassa devant elle, balbutia:  -- Va-t\'en! va-t\'en!  Tous deux galopaient, en entendant derrière leurs talons le souffle du père Jouve, qui s\'était mis également à courir.
FRENCH   Quatre hommes de bonne volonté transportèrent le blessé chez un pharmacien de la rue Gaillon, pendant que l\'omnibus reprenait lentement sa marche.
ENGLISH   The only real decrease had been on the fancy silks.
FRENCH   L\'architecte, par hasard intelligent, un jeune homme amoureux des temps nouveaux, ne s\'était servi de la pierre que pour les sous- sols et les piles d\'angle, puis avait monté toute l\'ossature en fer, des colonnes supportant l\'assemblage des poutres et des solives.
FRENCH   Des chiffres sonnaient, tout un marchandage fouettait les désirs, ces dames achetaient des dentelles à pleines trains.
FRENCH    Alors, Clara dut s\'occuper des brassées de vêtements empilés sur les tables.
FRENCH   Tu as vu son étalage, n\'est-ce pas? Toujours, il y plante ses plus belles confections, au milieu d\'un encadrement de pièces de drap, une vraie parade de saltimbanque pour raccrocher les filles...
FRENCH    -- Laissez donc, vous serez notre reine à toutes, quand vous voudrez.
ENGLISH    But they protested energetically.
ENGLISH   And I had discovered a splendid position, near the Opera House----\"  \"Well, why not?\" she asked.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! good day!\" replied the latter, shaking hands with the other ladies.
FRENCH    -- Partez donc! cria-t-il dans un flot de larmes.
ENGLISH   The two salesmen gazed vaguely into the depths of the shop.
ENGLISH   \"Just look at him sniffing for me with his big nose!\"  Jouve, in fact, was just then coming from the lace department, correctly arrayed in a white tie, and with his nose on the scent for some delinquent.
FRENCH   Denise s\'était renversée au fond du canapé, la tête contre le bois, secouée par une nouvelle crise de sanglots, qu\'elle étouffait dans son mouchoir.
FRENCH   Il y avait une seconde table à onze heures pour Mme Baudu, l\'autre commis et la demoiselle.
FRENCH   Elle dit, l\'air blessé, avec une lenteur majestueuse:  -- Un peu plus bas, mademoiselle.
FRENCH    Cette nuit-là, Denise s\'était résignée à faire de nouveau le cordonnier.
FRENCH   La femme se trouvait là, en train de remettre tranquillement son corset.
ENGLISH   But these Lothario-like beginnings, which were the talk of the shop, gradually disappeared in presence of the man\'s genius and victorious grace.
ENGLISH    With a mechanical step, Mouret went along the galleries, so absorbed that he yielded to the pushing of the crowd.
ENGLISH   For another minute Mouret continued looking at the work, at all the activity around this unpacking of goods which threatened to drown the basement; then, never adding a word but with the air of a captain satisfied with his men, he went off, again followed by Bourdoncle.
ENGLISH   She wept like a child.
FRENCH    Le lendemain, Denise était nommée première.
FRENCH   Malgré eux, comme Bourras qu\'ils trouvaient bête, ils revenaient toujours là, devant ce spectacle qui leur crevait le coeur.
FRENCH   Moi, je ne demande pas mieux.
ENGLISH   At times with their backs half turned and a dreamy look on their faces in order to put the terrible Bourdoncle off the scent, they would indulge in some sly gossip.
ENGLISH    \"What!\" exclaimed Madame de Boves, \"is Monsieur Mouret going to marry?\"  \"That\'s the latest news,\" replied Madame Desforges, affecting the greatest indifference.
FRENCH   Elle finit par dire:  -- Eh bien! nous vous laissons à vos achats.
ENGLISH   Always her brother! Really it was very stupid! Denise looked round at all of them: at Bourdoncle, who had taken a dislike to her from the first; Jouve, who had stopped to serve as a witness, and from whom she expected no justice; and then at those girls whom she had not been able to soften by nine months of smiling courage, who were happy, in fact, to help in turning her out of doors.
FRENCH   On les oublia, et sur les questions inquiètes de celui-ci, désireux de connaître son sort, il n\'attendit pas d\'être dans la rue, il lui apprit que ces messieurs du conseil s\'étaient décidés à se priver de ses services.
ENGLISH   And the bowing continued, all made way for Denise to pass, while Baugé rushed out to smile on her, as on the good fairy of the house.
ENGLISH   Daughter of an overseer in the Highways and Bridges Service, entirely ignorant of business matters, the young wife still retained the charming awkwardness of a girl educated in a convent.
FRENCH    Le drapier, pour cacher sa révolte intérieure, se jeta dans des phrases vagues: il connaissait Mme Aurélie, ou du moins son mari, Lhomme, le caissier, un gros qui avait eu le bras droit coupé par un omnibus.
FRENCH   Et mes frères? j\'ai juré de ne point me marier, je ne puis vous apporter deux enfants, n\'est-ce pas?  -- Ils seront aussi mes frères...
FRENCH    D\'ailleurs, Denise ne s\'en tenait pas à vouloir panser les plaies vives dont elle avait saigné: des idées délicates de femme, soufflées à Mouret, ravirent la clientèle.
FRENCH   C\'était fini, si Robineau ne rentrait pas.
ENGLISH   It was he alone who had thought of reserving the second-floor for the carpet and furniture galleries; for customers were less numerous in such departments which if placed on the ground floor would have often presented a chilly void.
ENGLISH    \"Well, gentlemen, I won\'t take anything on myself,\" said Bouthemont.
FRENCH   Les étalagistes renommés, Hutin, Mignot, d\'autres encore, venaient voir, levaient les yeux; mais ils affectaient de ne pas comprendre, étant d\'une école différente.
ENGLISH   She, left all alone, wept on in the silence, before the pins scattered over the dressing-table and the floor.
FRENCH   Là, les camisoles, les petits corsages, les robes du matin, les peignoirs, de la toile, du nansouk, des dentelles, de longs vêtements blancs, libres et minces, où l\'on sentait l\'étirement des matinées paresseuses, au lendemain des soirs de tendresse.
FRENCH    Mais une cloche sonnait, c\'était la deuxième table, dont Favier faisait partie.
ENGLISH   \"Oh, the hussies!\" said she, \"if they treated you in a proper way, you might make more than a hundred francs a month.\"  \"Everybody is down on me, and I\'m sure I don\'t know why,\" answered Denise, beginning to cry.
FRENCH   Elle avait parfaitement compris qu\'il s\'agissait de Colomban et de Clara.
FRENCH   Je vais faire porter cet argent à la caisse centrale...
FRENCH   À cette heure, ils sont ici, c\'est comme s\'ils mangeaient dans mon assiette!  Et, de son poing abattu sur le comptoir, il secouait la boutique, il faisait danser les parapluies et les ombrelles.
ENGLISH   You\'ll see it, ladies, and you\'ll see it nowhere else, for we have bought the exclusive right to it.\"  \"Really! a fine silk at five francs sixty centimes!\" said Madame Bourdelais, enthusiastic.
ENGLISH   The staff, utterly bewildered, had been obliged to work two nights and all day on Sunday, amidst frightful disorder.
FRENCH   Il en resta frappé, plus triste encore.
FRENCH    -- C\'est bien, finit par dire ce dernier.
ENGLISH   His plan was very simple, he pretended to be trying some gloves on her, waited till she had padded herself, and then conducted her to the pay-desk, where she paid for a single pair only.
FRENCH   J\'ai averti la direction, je vais en causer tout à l\'heure.
ENGLISH   But in the department devoted to woollens, occupying the gallery which ran towards the Rue de la Michodière, Bourdoncle resumed the part of executioner, on observing a young man seated on the counter, looking quite knocked up by a sleepless night; and this young man, a certain Liénard, son of a rich Angers draper, bowed his head beneath the reprimand, for in the idle, careless life of pleasure which he led his one great fear was that he might be recalled from Paris by his father.
FRENCH   Au rez-de-chaussée, il y avait une houle assombrie, agitée d\'un reflux, où l\'on ne distinguait que les visages délicats et ravis des femmes.
ENGLISH   Jean on the other hand promised his sister not to stir from the shop.
FRENCH   Vingt tables s\'y allongeaient, dans la clarté pâle des soupiraux; tout un peuple de commis s\'y bousculait, vidant les caisses, vérifiant les marchandises, les marquant en chiffres connus; et l\'on entendait sans relâche le ronflement voisin de la glissoire, qui dominait les voix.
FRENCH   Elle était bouleversée.
ENGLISH    \"Never mind,\" said the governor, good-naturedly, \"I wish all our employees to have good and abundant food.
FRENCH    -- Je le sais, répondit-il à demi-voix.
ENGLISH   \"It is not proper that we should be shut up together in this way.\"  He obeyed; and with his temples throbbing, hardly knowing how to conceal his anguish, he recalled Madame Aurélie, and broke out angrily about the stock of cloaks, saying that the prices must be lowered, until every one had been got rid of.
FRENCH    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
FRENCH    Alors, il lui prit les mains, il dit dans une explosion de tendresse, après la longue froideur qu\'il s\'était imposée:  -- Et si je vous épousais, Denise, partiriez-vous?  Mais elle avait retiré ses mains, elle se débattait comme sous le coup d\'une grande douleur.
ENGLISH   Otherwise it would seem to me that I was robbing you.\" His voice became husky with emotion.
ENGLISH   Colomban took down a roll from a shelf.
FRENCH   Mais elle ne le sentait pas, cette causerie avait remué tout le sang de son coeur.
ENGLISH   Besides, one doesn\'t grow much in these shops.
ENGLISH   He had thrown himself into an arm-chair, and now that he could discuss the matter, began to lament his own unfortunate position.
ENGLISH    The new decorations of the department were of a rich severity: on all sides were high carved oak cupboards with mirrors filling the whole space of their panels, while a red carpet muffled the continued tramping of the customers.
ENGLISH    \"What do you think of it--eh?\" asked Madame Marty of Madame Desforges.
FRENCH   Elle était très touchée, elle dit simplement, avec une fraternité attendrie, qui atténuait la pitié des mots:  -- Mon pauvre garçon!  Mais ils tressaillirent, ils se tournèrent.
ENGLISH   And then she would feel ashamed of the house, and suffer at the idea of what he must think of her, although perhaps they would never meet again.
FRENCH    Tout de suite, le sergent de ville interrogea cette jeune fille.
FRENCH   Quand elle redescendit, endimanchée, mal à l\'aise, elle regardait luire la jupe, elle éprouvait une honte aux bruissements tapageurs de l\'étoffe.
ENGLISH   \"They\'ll pick me up all right.\" He had now changed his route, going from the dining-room to the windows; and every time he came to these windows he cast a mournful glance on the wretchedness of the old show-goods forgotten there.
FRENCH   Et, rapprochés encore par cette crainte vague, se serrant davantage les uns contre les autres le gamin, toujours dans les jupes de la jeune fille et le grand derrière, ils faisaient leur entrée avec une grâce souriante et inquiète.
FRENCH    Quand elle arriva enfin au salon de lecture et de correspondance, Mme Bourdelais installa Madeleine, Edmond et Lucien devant la grande table; puis, elle prit elle-même, dans une bibliothèque, des albums de photographies qu\'elle leur apporta.
ENGLISH   She was beginning to feel frightened, when she caught sight of her, already a long way off, at the end of the Saint-Augustin Hall, deeply absorbed before a table covered with a heap of women\'s cravats at nineteen sous.
ENGLISH    Each one cut a piece, and then again dug the knife into the loaf up to the handle; and the bread still went round.
FRENCH   C\'est forcé, ma chère, et si naturel! Nous avons toutes passé par là.
ENGLISH   A great many of the shopmen, always side by side indoors, became perfect strangers, ignorant of each other\'s lives, as soon as they set foot in the streets.
FRENCH   Vingt fois par heure, le combat recommençait dans son être ravagé.
ENGLISH   The founder, Aristide Finet, had given his daughter, Désirée, to his first-hand, Hauchecorne; he, Baudu, who had arrived in the Rue de la Michodière with seven francs in his pocket, had married old Hauchecorne\'s daughter, Elizabeth; and in his turn he intended to hand over Geneviève and the business to Colomban as soon as trade should improve.
ENGLISH   His thick grey moustache and short cropped hair gave him a respectable military appearance; and he threw out his chest, on which was displayed the red ribbon of his decoration.
FRENCH    Mme Desforges ouvrait à peine la bouche, qu\'il reprenait:  -- Je sais, j\'ai votre affaire.
FRENCH   En vérité, je vous conseille, de juger les autres!  Toutes deux, face à face, frémissantes, se contemplaient.
FRENCH    -- Oh! il y a des femmes qui m\'ont bien embêté, ça je le confesse.
FRENCH   On n\'osait plus toucher à Robineau, qui avait repris connaissance, et dont les souffrances devenaient atroces, au moindre mouvement.
ENGLISH   I should not dare to sell one like it for more than ninety francs.\"  \"Just what I said!\" exclaimed Madame Bourdelais.
ENGLISH   It was Madame Aurélie, very stout and tightly laced in her black silk dress, the body of which, strained over her massive shoulders and full bust, shone like a piece of armour.
FRENCH   Avoue au moins que tu ne les estimes pas.
ENGLISH   Yes, you\'ll lose a part of yourself, my dear fellow.\"  Then he broke off again, laughing, to ask: \"That often happens, does it not, Monsieur de Vallagnosc?\"  \"So they say, baron,\" the latter merely replied.
ENGLISH   Afterwards, you can sell the other articles as dear as they are sold anywhere else, they\'ll still think yours the cheapest.
ENGLISH   In the glove department it was necessary to step over a pile of cases heaped up around Mignot; through the woollens there was no means of passing at all, Liénard was dozing on an ocean of bales, in which certain pieces standing on end, though half destroyed, seemed like houses which an overflowing river was carrying away; and, further on, the linen department appeared like a heavy fall of snow, and you stumbled against icebergs of napkins, and walked through flakes of handkerchiefs.
FRENCH   À l\'entendre, sa victoire ne faisait pas un doute, il mangerait le monstre.
ENGLISH   I bet it would be less than a thousand francs, your hand is so small!\"  But she drew back again.
FRENCH   Un silence régna.
FRENCH   Le salon s\'éveilla, clair et gai.
ENGLISH   Even Madame Guibal became enthusiastic.
ENGLISH   The figure passed from house to house amid cries of surprise and anger.
FRENCH    Cependant, lorsqu\'elle fut seule avec Jouve, elle ressentit un malaise; et, contrariée, elle quitta enfin la table.
ENGLISH   They were all nothing but pieces of mechanism forced to contribute of the working of the immense machine, abdicating all individuality and simply contributing their strength to the total, commonplace, phalansterian power.
ENGLISH    \"The Ladies\' Paradise,\" read Jean, with a soft laugh, like a handsome youth who already has thoughts of women.
FRENCH    Dès neuf heures, Denise était venue, pour rester auprès de sa tante.
FRENCH   Elle était donc descendue? Ses yeux rencontrèrent ceux de Mme Aurélie.
ENGLISH   And as she shook her head in token of refusal he continued: \"Tyrolian gloves, one franc twenty-five.
ENGLISH   We build fresh galleries on the vacant ground, we pull the houses down or re-arrange them and open the most extensive establishment in Paris--a bazaar which will bring in millions.\" And then he let this fervent, heartfelt exclamation escape him: \"Ah! if I could only do without you! But you hold everything now.
FRENCH   La conscience de sa défaite lui ôtait son ancienne assurance de patron respecté.
FRENCH   De quoi se plaignent-ils? Nous les payons immédiatement, nous prenons tout ce qu\'ils fabriquent, c\'est bien le moins qu\'ils travaillent à meilleur compte...
FRENCH   Six mois s\'étaient passés, on venait de retomber dans la morte-saison d\'hiver.
ENGLISH   She understood very little about the business, all these figures confused her; she could not understand why people worried over things so much, when it was so easy to be gay and love one another.
FRENCH    -- Possible, répondit ce dernier, quoique ça ne prouve rien, ce mioche.
ENGLISH   She started back at first, feeling very cold, oppressed at heart by the badly-lighted shop, now so extremely dismal.
ENGLISH   Both brothers, who had turned scarlet, stood smiling at their sister\'s employer.
ENGLISH    \"Take care, sir, my husband will certainly appeal to the Minister.\"  \"Come, you are not more reasonable than the others,\" declared Bourdoncle, losing patience.
FRENCH   La foule se précipitait, un coup de panique soufflait, ce vent de peur et de pitié qui ameute brusquement une rue.
ENGLISH   But Denise\'s victory was still more complete over the gentlemen; over Jouve, who now almost bent double whenever he addressed her; over Hutin, seized with anxiety on feeling his position giving way under him; and over Bourdoncle, at last reduced to powerlessness.
ENGLISH   \"Never! If my head were under the knife I should still say no, by heavens I would! I\'ve another ten years\' lease, and they shan\'t have the house before then, even if I should have to die of hunger within the four bare walls.
FRENCH    -- À propos, cria Favier, vous connaissez l\'aventure?  Mais il eut la voix couverte.
FRENCH   Il rêvait de les lancer plus loin, dans les départements voisins, il aurait voulu les entendre rouler sur toutes les routes de France, d\'une frontière à l\'autre.
ENGLISH   What! She still refused even at this price! In the distance he heard the clamour of his three thousand employees building up his immense fortune.
FRENCH   Elle risquait des lessives dans sa cuvette.
ENGLISH   The corsets and dress-improvers occupied one counter, there were hand-sown corsets, Duchess, cuirass, and, above all, white silk corsets, fan-pointed with divers colours, these latter forming a special display, an army of dummies without heads or legs, nothing indeed but busts; and close by were horse-hair and other dress improvers, often of fantastic aspect.
FRENCH   Parfois, des aveux lui échappaient: si Vinçard tâchait de vendre, tous n\'avaient plus qu\'à faire leurs paquets, car Vinçard était comme les rats, qui filent des maisons, quand elles vont crouler.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s Monsieur Robineau!\" she exclaimed, in her grievous astonishment.
FRENCH   Chez Mlle Tatin, la lingère du passage Choiseul, on en est à baisser les prix, à lutter de bon marché.
FRENCH   Dans le cadre de la porte, Lhomme était debout.
ENGLISH   His fears of the morning, that moment of unpardonable weakness which nobody would ever know of, inspired him with a greater desire to triumph.
FRENCH   Ça et l\'argent de sa caisse, il ne connaissait rien autre, en dehors de son admiration pour sa femme.
FRENCH   Même il y en a un, le petit Bavoux, qui lit des vers.
ENGLISH    \"You are wrong,\" said her uncle; \"a woman always needs a man.
ENGLISH   One end of the large table was entirely covered; it was like the tumbling of a fortune picked up in ten hours.
FRENCH   Je vous en prie, monsieur, laissez-moi, vous me faites du chagrin.
ENGLISH   Then suddenly turning to Denise, he added: \"However, it\'s her business, it isn\'t mine.
FRENCH    -- Mais il le faut bien, répondit de même Denise.
FRENCH    En effet, sa situation au Bonheur des Dames était menacée, depuis le dernier inventaire.
FRENCH   C\'était pour elle une misère noire, la misère en robe de soie.
FRENCH   Il cherchait à lui voir le visage, lorsqu\'il entendit un léger sanglot.
ENGLISH   Sunday was her hardest day: for she then cleaned her room, and mended her own things, so busy that it was often five o\'clock before she could comb her hair.
ENGLISH   Denise had blushed, troubled by these friendly allusions.
FRENCH   Au-dehors, un ciel d\'un bleu ardent chauffait les rues, des fiacres roulaient vers les gares, toute la population endimanchée gagnait en longues files les bois de la banlieue.
ENGLISH   Then Denise\'s confusion increasing, she slowly crossed the room and looked out of the window into the street, for the purpose of keeping countenance.
FRENCH   Denise alors désespéra; et, sans la pensée des enfants, elle serait partie pour mettre fin à cet interrogatoire inutile.
FRENCH    Il s\'interrompit pour montrer l\'inspecteur Jouve, qui précisément filait une femme enceinte, en bas, au comptoir des rubans.
ENGLISH   Denise, intimidated by the thought that they were watching her, sharpened her pencil, for the sake of something to do; then, imitating the others, she stuck it in her bosom, between two buttonholes, and summoned up all her courage, for it was necessary that she should conquer a position.
FRENCH   Enfin, il put s\'asseoir près de Bouthemont, qui n\'avait pas bougé.
ENGLISH     At this time the whole neighbourhood was talking of the great thoroughfare which was to be opened between the Bourse and the new Opera House, under the name of the Rue du Dix-Décembre.[1] The expropriation judgments had been delivered, and two gangs of demolishers were already beginning operations at either end, the first pulling down the old mansions in the Rue Louis-le-Grand, and the other destroying the thin walls of the old Vaudeville.
ENGLISH   Pray don\'t trouble to come any further.
FRENCH    Alors, il laissa échapper ce cri de son coeur:  -- Vous ne voyez donc pas que je souffre! ...
ENGLISH   The work-rooms, situated in the attics, were low sloping chambers, lighted by large windows cut in the zinc roofing, and furnished solely with long tables and large cast-iron stoves; and all along was a crowd of work-girls engaged on the under-clothing, the lace, the upholstery and the dressmaking, and living winter and summer in a stifling heat, amidst the odour peculiar to the business.
ENGLISH   Then, she went out after lunch in the hope of at least comforting these two.
FRENCH   Devant l\'allée, il devint brutal, et ce fut dans une révolte de dégoût qu\'elle lui jeta la porte au visage.
FRENCH    Elle paya un mois d\'avance, demanda le linge, une paire de draps et deux serviettes, et fit son lit sans attendre, heureuse, soulagée de savoir où coucher le soir.
ENGLISH   She could not see him, so she went into the linen department, then passed through again.
FRENCH    Alors, il se tut.
FRENCH   La première quinzaine encore, les choses marchèrent: elle était entrée avec dix francs en ménage, puis elle eut la chance de retrouver l\'entrepreneuse de cravates, qui lui paya ses dix-huit francs trente.
ENGLISH    \"Come,\" said Madame de Boves, \"we must go forward.
FRENCH   Mais elle restait béante: Vallagnosc était devant elle, ce mari d\'un mois dont le tutoiement la gênait encore; et il la questionnait en s\'étonnant de sa stupeur.
ENGLISH    \"You had permission to go to the theatre, then?\"  \"Yes, sir.\"  \"And have you enjoyed yourself? What theatre did you go to?\"  \"I have been in the country, sir.\"  This made him laugh.
ENGLISH   It\'s our master-stroke, which will save us and send our name everything.
ENGLISH    \"Listen to me, it\'s impossible for you to live in this way any longer.
ENGLISH   It was like a railway span, surrounded by the balustrades of the two storeys, intersected by hanging stairways and crossed by flying bridges.
ENGLISH   In short, we\'ll talk it over when the idea is ripe.\"  Then having finished signing his drafts, he rose, and tapped his lieutenant on the shoulder in a friendly manner, but the latter could not get over his astonishment.
FRENCH    Bourdoncle répondit simplement:  -- Soyez tranquille, vous aurez des preuves un de ces jours.
FRENCH    Et elle revint sur ce plan médité, elle répéta, dans sa fièvre, qu\'elle avait fait prier Mme Aurélie de lui envoyer Denise, pour voir un manteau qui allait mal.
ENGLISH    \"This is it,\" he resumed, \"you must attack their Paris Delight, which has been their success of the year.
FRENCH    Il continua, d\'une voix âpre, avec des intentions blessantes, qui surprirent les vendeurs, car d\'ordinaire ces sortes de discussions avaient lieu à l\'écart, et le cas pouvait du reste venir en effet d\'un malentendu.
ENGLISH   And a clamour rose up between the white houses, a mighty caressing breath swept along, as though Paris were opening her soul.
ENGLISH   My maid would never have found it.\" And turning round she added in her cheerful way: \"Come in, Monsieur Mouret, come through the little drawing-room; it will be less solemn.\"  Mouret bowed to the ladies, whom he knew.
FRENCH    Le baron le regarda quelques secondes en silence.
ENGLISH   In the rear, the reading-room still retained its quietude, only disturbed by the scratching of pens and the rustling of newspapers.
FRENCH   Les quatre premières voitures qui remuaient le commerce du quartier, autrefois, lorsque la maison n\'occupait encore que l\'angle de la place Gaillon, étaient montées peu à peu au chiffre de soixante-deux: petites voitures à bras, voitures à un cheval, lourds chariots à deux chevaux.
ENGLISH   Denise, astonished by the woman\'s discreet smile, opened the letter.
FRENCH    -- Aussi, toi, petit, tu lui montes la tête, tu lui fais croire que nous allons nous amuser!...
ENGLISH    The baron hesitated for a moment, and then denied it.
ENGLISH   Her childhood, spent amidst the rich verdure of Le Cotentin, was awakening with a regret for sun and air.
FRENCH   Mme de Boves était là, avec sa fille Blanche, toutes deux enfoncées dans des articles que Deloche leur montrait.
ENGLISH   Very vain, even to the point of objecting to be called by her husband\'s name, Lhomme, which annoyed her, and of denying the humble position of her father to whom she always referred as a regularly established tailor, she only proved gracious towards those young ladies who showed themselves flexible and caressing and bowed down in admiration before her.
FRENCH    -- Mais, déclara Mouret, pour beaucoup d\'entre elles ce serait au moins une fin honorable.
ENGLISH   For a long time he had felt his position giving way.
ENGLISH    \"Come, Denise, my girl, is it possible?\" he asked simply, crossing his poor trembling hands.
FRENCH   Eh bien! oui, mon cher, je l\'épouse, et je vous flanque tous à la porte, si vous bougez.
FRENCH    Cependant, Mouret, surpris de retrouver Denise, se pencha pour demander à Mme Aurélie ce que cette jeune fille faisait là; et, quand la première eut répondu qu\'elle se présentait comme vendeuse, Bourdoncle, avec son dédain de la femme, fut suffoqué de cette prétention.
FRENCH    -- Chut! murmura-t-il paternellement, elles vont vous entendre.
FRENCH   En attendant le corbillard qu\'une erreur attardait, ce monde vêtu de noir, piétinant dans la boue, levait des regards de haine sur le Bonheur, dont les vitrines claires, les étalages éclatants de gaieté, leur semblaient une insulte, en face du Vieil Elbeuf, qui attristait de son deuil l\'autre côté de la rue.
ENGLISH   Later on she had come to Paris from a shop at Langres, and was avenging herself in the capital for all the kicks with which her father had regaled her when at home.
FRENCH    -- Dame! dit-il avec un rire bon garçon, ce n\'est pas ma faute, s\'il s\'échappe toujours, à présent...
ENGLISH    It was very warm in this room.
ENGLISH    The latter with a gesture of boredom refused to admit it.
FRENCH   Henriette n\'en sort pas.
FRENCH   Oui, il a juré d\'ouvrir de longs crédits aux petites maisons, plutôt que d\'accepter mes prix.
FRENCH   Évidemment, ce devait être un chef de rayon, car tous les commis le saluaient.
FRENCH   Si vous voulez bien vous donner la peine...
ENGLISH   He could not help interfering politely.
ENGLISH    About two o\'clock a special squad of police was obliged to make the crowd move on, and to regulate the waiting carriages.
ENGLISH    \"Very good,\" said he at last, \"I\'ll speak to Colomban.\"  And without adding another word he continued his walk.
ENGLISH   And now the returns and reduction of prices system formed part of the everyday working of the new style of business.
FRENCH   Vrai, je ne sais où M.
ENGLISH    But without faltering she each time replied \"No--no.\"  Then at last he let this heart-cry escape him: \"But don\'t you see that I am suffering! Yes, it\'s stupid, but I am suffering like a child!\"  Tears came into his eyes.
ENGLISH    \"But if they made you a reasonable offer,\" Denise would mildly observe, without raising her eyes from her needle, \"it would be wiser to accept it.\"  This suggestion, however, only produced an outburst of ferocious obstinacy.
ENGLISH   Thereupon Denise, subjugated by this familiarity, opened her mind further, and allowed it to be seen that she was on the side of the big shops in the war between them and the small traders.
ENGLISH   Blanche, tall and sturdy, resembled her mother; but her face was already puffed out and her features seemed large--swollen, as it were, by unhealthy fat.
ENGLISH   Mouret looked on, without saying a word.
ENGLISH   The two salesmen had noticed her movements.
ENGLISH    \"Go with Mademoiselle,\" said the first-hand, giving the auxiliary the cloak.
ENGLISH    For the last ten minutes, Jouve had been searching all over the place for the governor; the latter, however, was looking at the building of the new façade in the Rue du Dix-Décembre.
FRENCH   Son colonel, autrefois, s\'était tué pour une gamine pareille, une figure insignifiante, délicate et modeste, dont un seul regard retournait les coeurs.
FRENCH    -- Il est charmant, dit le baron.
ENGLISH   Behind him, Hutin stooped down, saying: \"Beef and sauce.\"  With a mechanical movement of his fork, the cook picked up a piece of meat; then poured a spoonful of sauce over it, and Hutin, suffocated by the hot air from the kitchen, had hardly secured his portion, before the words, \"Beef, pungent sauce; beef, pungent sauce,\" followed each other like a litany; whilst the cook continued to pick up the meat and pour the sauce over it with the rapid rhythmical movement of a well-regulated clock.
ENGLISH    \"There\'s that bag of bones again,\" murmured Hutin.
ENGLISH   \"Come, try and calm yourself; there\'s nothing to upset you like this,\" she said.
ENGLISH   And so I felt sure that Pépé and I would be able to jog along.
ENGLISH    He set up a noisy laugh.
ENGLISH   Madame Guibal on the other hand walked about the shop for hours without ever buying anything, happy and satisfied in simply feasting her eyes; Madame de Boves, short of money and always tortured by some immoderate desire, nourished a feeling of rancour against the goods she could not carry away with her; Madame Bourdelais, with the sharp eyes of a careful and practical housewife, made straight for the bargains, availing herself of the big establishments with such skill that she saved a lot of money; and lastly, Henriette, having very elegant tastes, only purchased certain articles there, such as gloves, hosiery, and her coarser linen.
FRENCH   Des voix répétaient, au milieu de légers rires:  -- Monsieur Mouret! monsieur Mouret!  Et comme celui-ci, contrarié d\'être interrompu, feignait de ne pas entendre, Mme de Boves, debout depuis un moment, vint jusqu\'à la porte du petit salon.
FRENCH   Un être insupportable, toujours nerveux, et qui vous passerait sur le corps, tant il est fier!  C\'était la grande rancune du rayon.
ENGLISH   As for Marguerite, she was at last about to assume the management of the little shop at Grenoble, where her cousin was waiting for her.
FRENCH   Est-ce que je suis faite ainsi?  Denise, lentement, avait levé les yeux, plus pâle encore, et s\'était remise à piquer en silence les épingles.
FRENCH   Puis, à dix heures, c\'était le conseil, un véritable conseil des ministres, une réunion des douze intéressés de la maison, qu\'il lui fallait présider: on discutait les questions d\'ordre intérieur, on examinait les achats, on arrêtait les étalages; et elle était encore là, il entendait sa voix douce au milieu des chiffres, il voyait son clair sourire dans les situations financières les plus compliquées.
FRENCH    -- Tu sais, elle a voulu m\'accompagner.
FRENCH    Elle, ne comprenait toujours pas les refus de son amie.
FRENCH   Puis, le soubassement du premier étage, en briques émaillées, supportait de nouveau les glaces des larges baies, jusqu\'à la frise, faite d\'écussons dorés, aux armes des villes de France, et de motifs en terre cuite, dont l\'émail répétait les teintes claires du soubassement.
FRENCH   Vous savez qu\'il y a treize bons kilomètres, il fallait partir de Briquebec à cinq heures...
FRENCH   J\'ai peur que, pour un manteau, elle n\'ait point assez de corps.
FRENCH   On ne pouvait raisonnablement exiger qu\'il se ruinât, afin d\'épargner le quartier.
FRENCH   Comme on coupait la rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs, Robineau accourut se joindre au cortège, très pâle, l\'air vieilli.
FRENCH   Ainsi M.
ENGLISH   Just as Denise was about to leave her name Robineau himself came in, and at once engaged her, one of his two saleswomen having left him on the previous day to go to The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   Donne-moi cent sous.
ENGLISH   When the coffin gently slipped down, their blotched and pimpled cheeks paled, and their bleared eyes, blinded by the constant contemplation of figures, turned away.
ENGLISH   The latter, stopped in his writing, appeared greatly troubled.
ENGLISH    Mouret had slowly laid the lists on the table, and stood looking at Denise, who had remained seated, pen in hand.
ENGLISH   \"Besides, there\'s nothing bad in the letter.
ENGLISH    But she quickly raised her head, looked him straight in the face, and smiling, with her sweet, brave look replied: \"I am afraid of nothing, sir.
FRENCH   Entrée les yeux clairs, la peau fraîche du froid de la rue, elle s\'était lentement brûlé la vue et le teint, au spectacle de ce luxe, de ces couleurs violentes, dont le galop continu irritait sa passion.
FRENCH   Partout on avait gagné de l\'espace, l\'air et la lumière entraient librement, le public circulait à l\'aise, sous le jet hardi des fermes à longue portée.
FRENCH   On se tue là-dedans...
FRENCH   Ses souffrances du début la poignaient encore, une pitié lui remuait le coeur, à chaque nouvelle venue qu\'elle rencontrait dans les rayons, les pieds meurtris, les yeux gros de larmes, traînant sa misère sous sa robe de soie, au milieu de la persécution aigrie des anciennes.
FRENCH    -- Mademoiselle, commença-t-il, nous vous avions pris par égard pour votre oncle, et il ne faut pas nous mettre dans la triste nécessité...
ENGLISH   I\'ll not be the one to preach to you, or to tremble for the great interests we have confided to your care.
ENGLISH   It was like a dying note of triumph, the accompaniment subsided into a lower key in presence of this defeat of the master.
FRENCH   Jamais on ne la voyait en compagnie de son mari, un avocat connu au Palais, qui, disait-on, menait de son côté la vie libre, tout à ses loisirs et à ses plaisirs.
ENGLISH   But before doing so she forced Denise to accept the six francs she wanted to make up Pépé\'s board-money, begging her not to trouble about the matter, but to repay her the amount whenever she earned more.
FRENCH   Voyez donc, Colomban, j\'ai cru entendre quelqu\'un.
ENGLISH   And Mouret was especially grieved by the mortal silence which reigned in the hall, where the light fell from a ground-glass roofing through which the sunrays filtered in a white diffuse hovering dust, whilst down below the silk department seemed to be asleep, in a quivering, church-like quietude.
FRENCH   On avait vitré les cours, transformées en halls; et des escaliers de fer s\'élevaient du rez-de-chaussée, des ponts de fer étaient jetés d\'un bout à l\'autre, aux deux étages.
ENGLISH   Baudu began softly beating a tattoo with his fingers on the American cloth on the table.
FRENCH   Puis, ayant levé la tête, il aperçut Denise qui s\'était écartée.
FRENCH   Depuis des années, elle-même était prise entre les rouages de la machine.
ENGLISH    \"How old are you?\" she eventually inquired.
ENGLISH    \"I should think so; let her comb her hair to-morrow,\" said the terrible Bourdoncle to Madame Aurélie.
FRENCH    -- Patience! reprit Baudu, saisi d\'une soudaine colère, les faiseurs se casseront les reins! Mouret traverse une crise, je le sais.
ENGLISH   Still he did not hesitate to send him to the devil, with the brutality which he did not spare even his principal employees when things were looking bad.
ENGLISH   But she must find me getting really too thin now.
FRENCH    -- Dites, chuchotait la grande Prunaire à la petite Vadon, avez- vous vu ses bottines?  -- Et la robe donc! murmurait l\'autre.
FRENCH    -- En haut, tournez à gauche...
FRENCH   Il se nommait Hutin, était le fils d\'un cafetier d\'Yvetot, et avait su, en dix-huit mois, devenir un des premiers vendeurs, par une souplesse de nature, une continuelle caresse de flatterie, qui cachait un appétit furieux, mangeant tout, dévorant le monde, même sans faim, pour le plaisir.
ENGLISH   She was bewildered and attracted by this shop, to her so vast, which she saw more people enter in an hour than she had seen enter Cornaille\'s in six months; and with her desire to enter it was mingled a vague sense of danger which rendered her seduction complete.
ENGLISH   Lacassagne, at the feather and flower shop, and Madame Chadeuil, whose bonnets are so well-known, will be swept away in less than a couple of years.
FRENCH    Bouthemont, assis en face d\'elle, la regardait de ses beaux yeux rieurs, qu\'il tâchait de rendre graves.
FRENCH   Au loin, Paris grondait.
FRENCH    -- Vous comprenez, mon oncle, Jean entrera dès demain en apprentissage, chez son nouveau patron.
ENGLISH   Night had now come on, and she found the street quite dark, drenched by a fine close rain, which had been falling since sunset.
ENGLISH   \"I was there once, but was very little then.
ENGLISH   \"I have no wants.
FRENCH   Eh bien! il paraît que le patron l\'aurait...
FRENCH    Mouret avait ouvert les bras tout grands.
FRENCH   Il rôdait ainsi volontiers, vers la fin des repas, du côté de ces demoiselles.
FRENCH   Locataire de toute la maison, il sous-louait en garni les deux étages, pour diminuer son loyer.
FRENCH   C\'était une rage à souffrir.
FRENCH   Ne prenez donc pas cette figure d\'enterrement...
ENGLISH   At last she was able to ask in broken sentences:  \"Me! me! What for? What have I done?\"  Bourdoncle harshly replied that she knew very well, that she had better not provoke any explanation; and he spoke of the cravats, and added that it would be a fine thing if all the young ladies were to receive men down in the basement.
FRENCH   Les voix repartirent, les plumes grincèrent, tandis que Clara se hâtait de ramasser les vêtements.
FRENCH   Très intelligent, très actif, il semblait alors devoir supplanter aisément son camarade, moins sérieux, et qui avait toutes sortes de fuites, une apparente étourderie, des histoires de femme inquiétantes; mais il n\'apportait pas le coup de génie de ce Provençal passionné, ni son audace, ni sa grâce victorieuse.
FRENCH   À l\'instant, Robineau s\'était bien avisé, lui aussi, de souffler une cliente à Favier!  -- Oh! celui-là, il faut lui régler son compte, reprit Hutin qui profitait des plus minces faits pour ameuter le comptoir contre l\'homme dont il voulait la place.
ENGLISH   At this Bourras nearly went into a fit.
ENGLISH   It was the embryo of the vast trades\' unions of the twentieth century.
ENGLISH    It was Mouret taking a glance round the various departments.
FRENCH   Alors, les Baudu, exaspérés, durent même renoncer à fermer les yeux; ils étaient secoués dans leur alcôve, les bruits se changeaient en cauchemars, dès que la fatigue les engourdissait.
ENGLISH    \"Bah!\" resumed Baudu, to give himself courage; \"we shan\'t die of it, after all.
ENGLISH   The dismissed salesmen were named, in the same way as one counts the dead in time of cholera.
FRENCH   Ses gros yeux rouges vacillaient dans sa face jaune, ses paroles lentes s\'embarrassaient.
ENGLISH    \"Mademoiselle Prunaire, you had better attend to this lady instead of gossiping there.\"  \"I wasn\'t gossiping.\"  \"Have the kindness to hold your tongue, and attend to this lady immediately.\"  Clara gave in, conquered.
FRENCH    -- Vous avez beau pousser pour que la maison tombe...
FRENCH   Trouvez-moi un manche, et je vous donne vingt francs!  C\'était son orgueil d\'artiste, pas un ouvrier à Paris n\'était capable d\'établir un manche pareil aux siens, léger et solide.
ENGLISH   It was quite a new style of doing business, a seeming commercial phantasy which had formerly made Madame Hédouin anxious, and even now, notwithstanding certain successes, quite dismayed those who had capital in the business.
ENGLISH   But then he again returned to The Ladies\' Paradise; everything brought him back to it, as to a chronic complaint.
ENGLISH   I fancy, though, he wants to retire, on account of his rheumatics.\"  Vinçard\'s shop was in the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs, near the Passage Choiseul.
ENGLISH   She blushed slightly.
ENGLISH   It is said he has a grudge against us.
ENGLISH       CHAPTER IX.
FRENCH   D\'habitude, il s\'occupait fort peu du personnel; mais il affecta cette fois de voir là un empiétement de pouvoir, une tentative d\'échapper à son autorité.
ENGLISH   He also smiled in a feeble way, and escorted her as far as the door, as he might have done with a lady.
ENGLISH   A single gas-burner was alight--the shadows of the low ceiling fell in large masses, like black earth from a ditch.
FRENCH   Son visage épais, aux petits yeux tendres, prenait une commisération maternelle.
FRENCH    Baudu continua, présenta Colomban qui était de Rambouillet, comme le père de Mme Baudu; même il existait entre eux un cousinage éloigné.
FRENCH   Un autre commis, sur le bout du comptoir, les marquait ensuite en chiffres connus, et la vérification finie, la facture, signée par le chef de rayon, devait être montée à la caisse centrale.
FRENCH   Nous causions de Valognes.
FRENCH   Autrefois, quand le commerce était honnête, les nouveautés comprenaient les tissus, pas davantage.
ENGLISH   Her skinny arms, consumed by the burning fever of consumption, were in a perpetual movement of anxious, unconscious searching; whilst her black hair, heavy with passion, seemed thicker still, and to be preying with its voracious vitality upon her poor face, that face in which was fading the final degenerateness of a long lineage, a family that had grown and lived in the gloom of that cellar of old commercial Paris.
FRENCH   Méfiez-vous, car elle vous tirera plus de sang et d\'argent que vous ne lui en aurez sucé.
FRENCH   Aussi finit-elle par quitter son fauteuil.
FRENCH   Puis, quand le domestique eut refermé la porte, il saisit vivement la main de la jeune femme, qu\'il baisa avec tendresse.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! là, en face...
ENGLISH   Men were yelling, and must have come to blows, for one could hear a scuffle, chairs falling, quite a struggle indeed, amid which the river-cries again resounded:  \"Duck \'em, the counter-jumpers!\"  \"Pitch \'em in, the sawbones!\"  And when the landlord\'s loud voice had calmed this tempest, Hutin, wearing a red jersey, and with a little cap at the back of his head, suddenly made his appearance, having on his arm the tall, fair girl, who had been steering his boat and who by way of wearing the crew\'s colours, had planted a bunch of poppies behind her ear.
ENGLISH       CHAPTER III.
ENGLISH    When Denise returned to the mantle department Madame Aurélie told Marguerite to finish calling out the garments.
ENGLISH    \"Why have you come down?\" asked Marguerite of Denise, good-naturedly.
ENGLISH   But Madame Marty was especially excited by the new departments; they could indeed never open a new department but she must inaugurate it, she was bound to plunge in and buy something.
FRENCH   Cette fille, décidément, devait être la rivale qu\'elle avait eu la curiosité de venir voir.
FRENCH    -- Mais, dit Mouret, elle gagne ses trois francs par jour à coudre des cahiers d\'échantillons, et je crois que je vais lui faire épouser un de mes garçons de magasin.
FRENCH   Mais, comme le convoi allait partir, celle-ci, qui ne pleurait plus, les yeux brûlés de larmes, la pria de suivre le corps et de veiller sur l\'oncle, dont l\'accablement muet, la douleur imbécile inquiétait la famille.
FRENCH   Elle suivit son dos, au milieu des bousculades du trottoir.
FRENCH   Mais aucun ne semblait la satisfaire.
ENGLISH   People invaded even the furnishing department, usually the quietest of all.
FRENCH   Une nappe enfilait la grande galerie centrale, découpait sur un fond de flammes les escaliers, les ponts volants, toute cette guipure de fer suspendue.
FRENCH    Baugé, échappé de son rayon, était là, de l\'autre côté du lit.
FRENCH   Jouve, l\'oreille tendue au bruit des pas, jeta vivement un regard autour de lui; et, très excité, sortant de sa tenue, dépassant ses familiarités de père, il voulut la baiser sur le cou.
ENGLISH    \"By Jove!\" exclaimed Hutin, waking up as if from a dream, \"wasn\'t I a flat not to pay court to her! I should be all right now!\"  Then on seeing Favier laugh he blushed at this confession, and pretended to laugh himself, adding, as though to recall his words, that it was she who had ruined him with the management.
ENGLISH    Baudu became paler still, and bent his shoulders.
FRENCH   Puis, les pas se rapprochèrent; et, en allongeant la tête, elle reconnut l\'inspecteur Jouve, qui venait de s\'engager dans le corridor, de son air raide.
FRENCH   Puis, un matin, des ouvriers arrivèrent.
FRENCH   La voûte de la longue salle était chargée d\'or; aux deux extrémités, des cheminées monumentales se faisaient face; de médiocres tableaux, très richement encadrés, couvraient les murs; et, entre les colonnes, devant chacune des baies cintrées qui ouvraient sur les magasins, il y avait de hautes plantes vertes, dans des vases de majolique.
ENGLISH   I don\'t want to lose my turn!\"  However, Robineau was calling him: \"Whose turn, gentlemen? Monsieur Hutin\'s? Where\'s Monsieur Hutin?\"  And as that gentleman still gave no reply, it was the next salesman who served the lady with the blotches.
FRENCH   Puis, il reprit de son air tranquille:  -- Nous voulons bien, madame, étouffer cette fâcheuse affaire, par égard pour votre famille.
FRENCH   Elle apportait tout ce qu\'on trouve de bon chez la femme, le courage, la gaieté, la simplicité; et, de sa douceur, montait un charme, d\'une subtilité pénétrante de parfum.
FRENCH   Sans les soutiens de droite et de gauche, elle serait tombée, les ardoises de sa toiture tordues et pourries, sa façade de deux fenêtres couturée de lézardes, coulant en longues taches de rouille sur la boiserie à demi mangée de l\'enseigne.
FRENCH    -- C\'est ton affaire, tu es bien libre, répéta d\'abord Baudu.
FRENCH   Et chacun, de sa main vide, recevait au passage une de ces bouteilles, puis, dès lors embarrassé, gagnait sa table d\'un air sérieux, veillant à l\'équilibre.
ENGLISH   When she heard Madame Marty say that she did not wish to pay more than two hundred francs, she made a grimace of pity.
ENGLISH   For a moment, Mouret appeared to be absorbed in the lists of articles, never giving the girl a glance.
FRENCH   En vérité, mon cher, vous n\'aurez jamais le sens de la femme.
ENGLISH   I warn you, however, that cloth will be greatly worn this year; you\'ll see our _matelassés_ and our cheviots.\"  They had ceased to interrupt him, and drew yet closer, their lips parted by vague smiles, their faces eagerly out-stretched as if their whole beings were springing towards the tempter.
ENGLISH   Then, with an air of affectionate conviction, she began to whisper to her.
FRENCH   C\'étaient un cliquetis grandissant de fourchettes, des glouglous de bouteilles qu\'on vidait, des chocs de verres reposés trop vivement, le bruit de meule de cinq cents mâchoires solides broyant avec énergie.
FRENCH    Ensuite, il plaisanta.
ENGLISH    Henriette thereupon intervened.
FRENCH   Puis, elle ajouta:  -- Vous allez aux confections...
FRENCH    Mais la table de Hutin était voisine, et quand il eut aperçu Baugé, qu\'il connaissait, il engagea la conversation d\'une voix aiguë, pour continuer à occuper la salle.
FRENCH   En face d\'eux, c\'était comme un mur de ténèbres, une masse d\'ombre, si compacte, qu\'ils ne distinguaient pas même la trace pâle du sentier.
FRENCH   D\'abord, on devait s\'écraser pour entrer, il fallait que, de la rue, on crût à une émeute; et il obtenait cet écrasement, en mettant sous la porte les soldes, des casiers et des corbeilles débordant d\'articles à vil prix; si bien que le menu peuple s\'amassait, barrait le seuil, faisait penser que les magasins craquaient de monde, lorsque souvent ils n\'étaient qu\'à demi pleins.
FRENCH   Elle était un peu ma parente.
ENGLISH    \"Shut up,\" said Liénard; \"you talk too much, old man.\"  The heat had yet increased, the candles were guttering down on to the wine-stained table-cloths; and through the open windows, whenever the noise within ceased for an instant, there came a distant prolonged murmur, the voice of the river, and of the lofty poplars falling asleep in the calm night.
ENGLISH   Their eyes grew dim, and slight quivers ran through them but he meantime retained his calm, conquering air, amidst the intoxicating perfumes which their hair exhaled; and between each sentence he continued to sip a little of his tea, the aroma of which softened those sharper odours.
ENGLISH   Whereas Monsieur Mouret! Do you think that Monsieur Mouret could marry one of his saleswomen?\"  \"Oh! no, oh! no,\" exclaimed Denise, shocked by the absurdity of the question, \"and that\'s why he ought never to have written to me.\"  This argument seemed to astonish Pauline.
ENGLISH   \"Pass the bread!\"  The big loaf was sent round, and after cutting a slice for himself he dug the knife into the crust.
FRENCH   À la vérité, elle rendait quatre objets sur cinq, elle commençait à être connue de tous les comptoirs, pour les négoces étranges, flairés sous l\'éternel mécontentement qui lui faisait rapporter les articles un à un, après les avoir gardés plusieurs jours.
ENGLISH    \"I say,\" whispered tall Mdlle.
ENGLISH   Madame Desforges went in, leaving the folding doors open behind her, and handed the fan to one of the four ladies who were seated in the middle of the room.
FRENCH   Aussi, maintenant, faisaient-ils traîner le repas, peu soucieux de remonter au rayon avant l\'heure.
FRENCH    Lui-même dans l\'escalier, se frottait rudement les yeux, pour effacer la trace de ses larmes.
ENGLISH   Without insisting on handsome girls, the managers of the house liked their assistants to be of agreeable appearance.
ENGLISH   I reckoned on this sale.\"  \"By Jove! a hundred francs; that\'s rather stiff,\" retorted Favier.
FRENCH    D\'ailleurs, un soulèvement général se produisit contre Denise.
ENGLISH    Denise was in great trouble.
FRENCH    -- As-tu remarqué ta fille, depuis quelque temps?  -- Non, répondit-il.
ENGLISH   And he railed at the despairing ones, the disgusted ones, the pessimists, all those weak, sickly offsprings of our budding sciences, who assumed the lachrymose airs of poets, or the affected countenances of sceptics, amidst the immense activity of the present day.
FRENCH   Quand on lui dit que huit heures sonnaient, il demeura béant! Pas possible, il sortait de chez son patron.
ENGLISH   Then the abandonment became complete, they all made a butt of the \"unkempt girl,\" who lived on in an hourly struggle, only managing by dint of the greatest courage to hold her own in the department.
FRENCH   Que disait-elle donc et que voulait-elle? Jamais les filles ramassées par lui dans les rayons, ne s\'étaient inquiétées d\'être aimées.
ENGLISH   So Denise called Marguerite to clear the article out of the department, it being one of the previous year\'s patterns, and Marguerite, at a glance from her comrade, presented it as an exceptional bargain.
ENGLISH    Sometimes she would become quite animated, and picture an immense ideal bazaar, the phalansterium of modern commerce, in which each would secure his exact share of profits, according to his merits, with a certainty of the future, assured to him by contract.
FRENCH   Toutes les chaises étaient prises, autour de la grande table couverte de journaux.
FRENCH   Il aimait parler et avoir raison.
ENGLISH   She had just come from the merinoes which were in the charge of Liénard to whom she had escorted Madame Boutarel, that provincial lady who came to Paris twice a year, to scatter the money she saved out of her housekeeping all over the Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH    -- Hein? mes douleurs? murmura-t-il étonné.
FRENCH    -- Vous lui avez fait entendre que je comptais sur le Baron, aujourd\'hui?  -- Sans doute...
FRENCH   Mouret venait d\'entrer avec Vallagnosc et Bourdoncle; et il saluait ces dames, il recevait leurs compliments pour sa magnifique exposition des nouveautés d\'hiver.
FRENCH   Ce sera superbe quand même...
ENGLISH   A franc-piece taken out of it left an abyss which she did not know how to fill up.
ENGLISH   Pépé, who was also fair, with the fairness of infancy, now clung closer to her, as if anxious to be caressed, perturbed and delighted as he was by the sight of the beautiful ladies in the window.
ENGLISH   What! that one as well! that noble-looking lady! Really it was time to have them all searched! And Blanche, who was left free, followed her mother at a distance, lingering amidst the sea of faces, livid, and hesitating between the duty of not deserting her mother and the terror of being detained with her.
FRENCH    Mme de Boves remercia.
ENGLISH   Then too he fought against her as against a fatal influence which would place the house in peril on the day when Mouret should succumb.
ENGLISH    Other young men now sat down around them.
FRENCH    -- Oh! monsieur Mouret! monsieur Mouret! balbutiaient des voix chuchotantes et pâmées, au fond des ténèbres du salon.
FRENCH   Mlle de Fontenailles gagnait trois francs par jour, qui lui permettaient tout juste de vivre, dans une petite chambre de la rue d\'Argenteuil.
FRENCH   Pourquoi n\'avoir pas mis les robes et costumes près des confections? En voilà un gâchis!  Mme Marty, dont les yeux se dilataient, grisée par ce défilé de choses riches qui dansaient devant elle, répétait à demi-voix:  -- Mon Dieu! que va dire mon mari?...
FRENCH   Nous en recauserons.
FRENCH    -- Très bien placé, répondit-il, les yeux brillants.
FRENCH   Il se leva, il protesta.
FRENCH    Ils partirent.
ENGLISH   Oh, I don\'t ask you for any of your secrets, but I am going to entrust you with mine, for I\'m certain that I couldn\'t place them in better hands.
FRENCH   Il faut espérer...
ENGLISH   The idea! Fancy goods! Really those people had no pride whatever, they would even end by selling fish.
ENGLISH   Round the columns descended flounces of Malines and Valenciennes, white dancers\' skirts, unfolding in a snowy shiver to the floor.
ENGLISH   We cannot make you thinner than you are.\"  \"Stout! stout!\" exclaimed Henriette, turning pale in her turn.
FRENCH   Du reste, il faut bien finir par là.
ENGLISH   Here, all the purchases which customers did not take away with them, were sent down, sorted on tables, and placed in compartments each of which represented a particular district of Paris; then by a large staircase opening just opposite The Old Elbeuf, they were sent up to the vans standing alongside the pavement.
FRENCH   Sans doute, il aurait pu voir le financier dans son cabinet, pour causer à l\'aise de la grosse affaire qu\'il voulait lui proposer.
FRENCH   Jamais vous n\'habillerez une femme un peu distinguée.
ENGLISH   Clara had only ten francs about her, and she lent them with a fairly good grace.
ENGLISH   When day broke, she became calmer, but a feeling of resigned sadness still kept her awake, turned towards the window whose panes were brightening.
FRENCH    Près des enfants, une dame disparaissait entre les pages d\'une revue.
ENGLISH   In the centre was a magnificent article, a velvet mantle trimmed with silver fox; on one side of it appeared a silk cloak lined with miniver, on the other a cloth cloak edged with cocks\' plumes; and, last of all, some opera cloaks in white cashmere and quilted silk trimmed with swansdown or chenille.
FRENCH    Le soir, Denise fut embarrassée pour annoncer à Bourras qu\'elle le quittait.
ENGLISH   Suddenly, however, through the half-open doorway, she perceived Mouret; and he, on his side, had at last guessed it to be her.
FRENCH   Et puis, c\'est son père qui recule le mariage.
FRENCH    Henriette montra la plus grande surprise.
ENGLISH    However, Denise, warned by the slight noise, had raised her head.
FRENCH   Vivement, elle se releva.
FRENCH    -- Misérables! dit-elle en faisant claquer la porte.
FRENCH   Seulement, pour atteindre ce gros chiffre, elle devait se montrer travailleuse et forte, ne pas se chagriner des mauvaises volontés autour d\'elle, se battre et arracher sa part aux camarades, s\'il le fallait.
FRENCH   La caisse d\'Albert Lhomme se trouvait à sa gauche; il la connaissait de vue, il se permit un sourire aimable, sans hâte aucune au milieu du flot de factures qui l\'assiégeait; pendant que, derrière lui, Joseph, se battant avec la boîte à ficelle, ne pouvait suffire à empaqueter les articles.
FRENCH   Il semblait que la masure, s\'entêtant au milieu de ces démolitions, allait se fendre.
ENGLISH   In order not to bedim the show of goods, the ground-floor decoration was of a sober description; the base of sea-green marble; the corner piers and bearing pillars covered with black marble, the severity of which was brightened by gilded modillions; and all the rest was plate-glass, in iron sashes, nothing but glass, which seemed to throw the depths of the halls and galleries open to the full light of day.
ENGLISH   But afterwards came articles of fine linen, white cuffs and cravats, white fichus and collars, an infinite variety of light trifles, a white foam which escaped from the boxes and was heaped up like so much snow.
FRENCH   Autrement, il me semblerait que je vous vole.
ENGLISH     It was on the 25th of September that the building of the new façade of The Ladies\' Paradise commenced.
ENGLISH   But The Paradise people immediately improved on the invention, and a struggle of prices began.
ENGLISH   \"Pépé\'s board isn\'t paid yet, and I\'ve only just the money for it.
FRENCH   Le vent tombait, ils n\'entendaient plus que le ruissellement de la rivière.
ENGLISH   He enjoyed, moreover, a perfect liberty, and bought what he liked, provided that he increased the yearly business of his department in a certain proportion, settled beforehand; and it was on this proportion that his commission was based.
FRENCH    À cette heure matinale, les tables de triage étaient nues, les compartiments ne contenaient que les quelques paquets restés de la veille.
ENGLISH   And, if this man was to marry her, she must be giving up all to follow him: that explained her obstinacy.
FRENCH   Autour des colonnettes de fer, s\'élevaient des bouillonnés de mousseline blanche, noués de place en place par des foulards blancs.
ENGLISH   I only wanted to embrace you.\"  Tears filled her eyes.
ENGLISH   The uproar from the restaurant was slowly dying away, changing into a musical sweetness in the calmness of the night; and still feverish from that furnace, whose lights were disappearing one by one behind the foliage, they went further in amidst the coolness of the trees.
FRENCH    -- As-tu dix francs? balbutia-t-il.
FRENCH    Cette soie, depuis que les réclames étaient lancées, occupait dans leur vie quotidienne une place considérable.
FRENCH    Il s\'agissait de l\'inscription au tableau de ligne, qui réglait les tours de vente.
ENGLISH   \"What! are you Baudu\'s niece?\" said he, \"is it Baudu who sent you here?\"  \"Oh! no, sir!\" answered Denise; and she could not help laughing as she spoke for the idea appeared to her so singular.
FRENCH   Chacun d\'eux veillait sur une province.
ENGLISH    \"Overwork!\" repeated Vallagnosc, with ironic apathy.
FRENCH   On me l\'avait affirmé, je venais pour savoir.
FRENCH   On se dévorait devant les comptoirs, la femme y mangeait la femme, dans une rivalité aiguë d\'argent et de beauté.
FRENCH   Il souffrait de ne plus avoir autour de lui que des visages renfrognés.
FRENCH   Le fondateur Aristide Finet, avait donné sa fille Désirée à son premier commis Hauchecorne; lui, Baudu, débarqué rue de la Michodière avec sept francs dans sa poche, avait épousé la fille du père Hauchecorne, Élisabeth: et il entendait à son tour céder sa fille Geneviève et la maison à Colomban, dès que les affaires reprendraient.
ENGLISH   They could still hear the softened roar of the stock-taking behind the closed door.
FRENCH   J\'ai senti le sol trembler...
FRENCH   On finissait, les employés, renversés sur leurs chaises, attendaient le coup de cloche, s\'interpellant de loin dans l\'abandon du repas.
ENGLISH    \"Well, the Chantilly isn\'t dear.
ENGLISH   Prices were quoted, a feverish desire to buy and bargain stirred all the ladies; they were purchasing lace by the mile.
FRENCH    -- Vous savez qu\'elles se rattraperont.
ENGLISH   This man Mouret is ruining them.
ENGLISH   Formerly the employees had been allowed an hour for meals, which had enabled them to go to a café and take their coffee; and they would then despatch their dinner in twenty minutes, anxious to get into the street.
ENGLISH    \"We shan\'t be robbed so much,\" remarked Bourdoncle, with satisfaction.
ENGLISH   Nearly all the saleswomen were new-comers.
FRENCH   Même lorsqu\'il avaient une heure d\'espoir, une joie inattendue, il suffisait du fracas d\'un tombereau de briques, de la scie d\'un tailleur de pierres ou du simple appel d\'un maçon, pour la leur gâter aussitôt.
FRENCH   Si vous le revoyez, dites-lui que je lui pardonne...
ENGLISH   The latter declared the beef excellent; and Mignot, astounded by this quiet assertion, was repeating, \"But chew it, and see;\" whilst Liénard, attacking the skate, gently remarked, \"But it stinks, sir!\" Mouret thereupon launched into a cordial speech; he would do everything for his employees\' welfare, he was their father, and would rather eat dry bread himself than see them badly fed.
FRENCH    -- Oui, ajouta Mme Marty, je cherchais où j\'avais déjà vu cette tournure...
ENGLISH    But he suddenly caught sight of Denise.
FRENCH   Certainement, elle y souffrirait encore, elle souffrait déjà d\'un malaise inconnu, depuis les histoires de Deloche.
FRENCH   Il se tenait sous le vestibule, grave, attentif, dévisageant chaque femme au passage.
FRENCH   Ses yeux gris prirent une flamme tendre, ses joues se creusèrent d\'adorables fossettes, ses pâles cheveux eux-mêmes semblèrent voler, dans la gaieté bonne et courageuse de tout son être.
FRENCH   D\'abord, au plafond, étaient tendus des tapis de Smyrne, dont les dessins compliqués se détachaient sur des fonds rouges.
FRENCH   Un vieux monsieur s\'était endormi sur le _Moniteur_.
FRENCH    -- Hein? qu\'en pensez-vous? demanda Mme Marty à Mme Desforges.
FRENCH   Au loin, celle-ci venait d\'entendre une rumeur de foule.
FRENCH    Et les voix tombèrent, ne furent plus qu\'un murmure.
ENGLISH   It was a square room with a large marble counter; at either end there were silvered filters from which trickled small streams of water; whilst rows of bottles stood on small shelves behind.
ENGLISH   Then her aunt\'s death, this fresh catastrophe, had quite overwhelmed the young girl, though Mouret had again offered his services, giving her leave to do what she liked for her uncle and the others.
ENGLISH    \"Well, we must go in,\" declared Denise.
FRENCH    Mais brusquement, il feignit de voir Mme Guibal.
ENGLISH   Midnight struck as he was pouring out the tea.
ENGLISH   Do me the favour of setting my doubts at rest.
FRENCH   Seulement, je vous en prie, ne me parlez plus comme vous venez de le faire...
FRENCH   Les uns échangeaient des mots, regardaient en l\'air, semblaient se dérouiller pour une nouvelle journée de travail; d\'autres, sans se presser, retiraient les serges vertes, dont ils avaient, la veille au soir, couvert les marchandises, après les avoir repliées; et les piles d\'étoffes apparaissaient, rangées symétriquement, tout le magasin était propre et en ordre, d\'un éclat tranquille dans la gaieté matinale, en attendant que la bousculade de la vente l\'ait une fois de plus obstrué et comme rétréci d\'une débâcle de toile, de drap, de soie, et de dentelle.
ENGLISH   But now the governor was becoming childish, drifting into a ridiculous marriage, ruining his luck, destroying his charm over the customers.
ENGLISH   By always living together, shut up here together, without any other distractions between us, I must have ended by believing him to be my husband before he really was.
FRENCH   C\'est pour ma cuisinière...
FRENCH    Du coup, Baudu resta muet.
FRENCH   C\'était la première fois qu\'il la sentait conquise à ce point; et, trop supérieur pour en souffrir, il éprouvait seulement une compassion, à la voir aux mains de ce gaillard si tendre et si parfaitement froid.
FRENCH   Était-ce possible qu\'on lui eût préféré cette créature insignifiante? Elle se souvenait, cette créature était bien celle qu\'elle avait vue, autrefois, faire à ses débuts une figure si sotte, maladroite comme une gardeuse d\'oies qui débarque de son village.
FRENCH   Ces demoiselles plaisantaient aussi Mme Frédéric, lui prêtaient des relations discrètes avec de grands personnages; la vérité était qu\'on ne savait rien de ses affaires de coeur; elle disparaissait le soir, raidie dans sa maussaderie de veuve, l\'air pressé, sans que personne pût dire où elle courait si fort.
FRENCH    -- Voilà un gaillard qui a bon appétit, déclara Baudu en constatant que Jean avait achevé son veau.
ENGLISH   The struggle was becoming impossible, he was fighting against a superior force; it would be madness to refuse the fortune offered him.
FRENCH   Est-ce qu\'il n\'est pas la santé nécessaire, la force et l\'ordre mêmes de la vie!...
ENGLISH   On the ticket was the measurement, diminished at each sale by the quantity sold; which greatly simplified the work.
FRENCH    -- Oh! mon oncle, me marier! vous n\'y pensez pas!...
ENGLISH   Have you heard that the second-hand in the mantle department once had a regular fancy for you?\"  Hutin seemed greatly surprised.
ENGLISH   And he remained there, without wiping himself, choked with anger at such brutality.
ENGLISH   From to-morrow you will take her place as second-hand.\"  Denise listened to him motionless with surprise.
FRENCH    -- Un tas d\'ignorants, disait-il, qui se contentent de coller de la soie sur des baleines! Ils achètent leurs manches à la grosse, des manches tout fabriqués...
FRENCH   Il intéressait désormais ses vendeurs à la vente de toutes les marchandises, il leur accordait un tant pour cent sur le moindre bout d\'étoffe, le moindre objet vendu par eux: mécanisme qui avait bouleversé les nouveautés, qui créait entre les commis une lutte pour l\'existence, dont les patrons bénéficiaient.
FRENCH   Quelques femmes écrivaient, le nez dans leurs phrases, comme pour cacher le papier sous les fleurs de leurs chapeaux.
ENGLISH   The men who had brought it were waiting to take it away as soon as the doctor should arrive.
ENGLISH   This went on for some time: she had to pass from one shoulder to the other, and was even obliged to go almost on her knees, in order to pull the mantle down in front.
FRENCH   Une demoiselle de magasin qui attend.
ENGLISH   She a thief! What did he take her for? She was the Countess de Boves, her husband, Inspector-General of the State Studs, was received at Court.
ENGLISH   But she had the greatest trouble in the world to get into the street again through the crowd, which was struggling before the door of the chemist\'s shop.
ENGLISH   It was the glover, Mignot, who had escaped from his department.
FRENCH   Depuis longtemps, sa situation craquait; au dernier inventaire, on lui avait reproché d\'être resté au-dessous du chiffre d\'affaires fixé d\'avance; et c\'était encore, c\'était surtout la lente poussée des appétits qui le mangeait à son tour, toute la guerre sourde du rayon le jetant dehors, dans le branle même de la machine.
FRENCH   Ce jour-là, quand elle vit les yeux gros de ce dernier, elle le sermonna doucement.
ENGLISH   Beyond, they saw nothing but the sky, a sheet of sky, which cast in the sleeping water of the glass work a reflection of the flight of its clouds and its soft azure.
ENGLISH   Thus even Madame Aurélie continued in a kinder tone: \"And why did you leave Cornaille\'s?\"  \"For family reasons,\" replied Denise, turning scarlet.
ENGLISH   Monsieur Gaujean came this morning, and they went out together.\"  She was still charming, delicate, and gay; but was in a delicate state of health and seemed more frightened, more bewildered than ever by those dreadful business matters, which she did not understand, and which were all going wrong.
FRENCH   Là, un tonnerre l\'inquiéta, le ronflement sonore de Joseph, le garçon, qui dormait derrière les articles de deuil.
ENGLISH   It\'s bound to be.\"  \"No fear,\" cried Mouret, exaggerating his Southern accent.
FRENCH   Ce n\'est pas moi qui vous ferai de la morale, ni qui tremblerai pour les gros intérêts que nous vous avons confiés.
FRENCH   Elle finit par dire au commis qui lui montrait le matelassé:  -- Eh bien! non, je vais à la soie...
FRENCH   La tente du hall des soieries en était l\'alcôve géante, avec ses rideaux blancs, ses gazes blanches, ses tulles blancs, dont l\'éclat défendait contre les regards la nudité blanche de l\'épousée.
ENGLISH   Four years had sufficed for the Japanese department to attract the entire artistic custom of Paris.
ENGLISH   Quite an army of decorators, marble-cutters, mosaic-workers, and others, were at work.
FRENCH   Elle s\'effrayait, lorsqu\'elle l\'aperçut, déjà loin, au bout du hall Saint-Augustin, profondément absorbée devant une table de proposition, sur laquelle s\'entassaient des cravates de femme à dix-neuf sous.
FRENCH   C\'était toute une affaire nouvelle.
ENGLISH   Then, in reply to a discreet question, Paul intimated that nothing was yet settled; perhaps nothing would be settled.
ENGLISH   She ate ravenously, devouring everything with the voracity of one who, being badly fed at the shop, made up for it out of doors by giving herself an indigestion of all the things she liked.
FRENCH   Le vieux toqué, comme il l\'appelait, désolait sa vie, gâtait son triomphe, par son entêtement idiot à ne pas céder sa maison, cette ignoble masure dont les plâtres salissaient le Bonheur des Dames, le seul petit coin du vaste pâté échappé à la conquête.
ENGLISH   There was at that time, in the Paris market, a traveller connected with all the leading tailors, who saved the little cloth and flannel houses when he condescended to represent them.
ENGLISH   The slightest noise shook the old hovel which clung to the side of the colossus, and shared in its pulsations.
ENGLISH    \"Five francs!\" he would exclaim each time.
ENGLISH   Mademoiselle Prunaire, give me the book.\"  But the book could not be found; Jouve, the inspector, had probably got it.
FRENCH    Enfin, on rouvrit les portes, et le flot entra.
ENGLISH   The flock pushed forward, without a laugh or a word, amidst an increasing clatter of crockery and a strong odour of food.
FRENCH   Geneviève, chez qui s\'aggravait encore la dégénérescence de sa mère, avait la débilité et la décoloration d\'une plante grandie à l\'ombre.
FRENCH   Il s\'arrêta net, dit à Jouve d\'aller chercher le directeur, pendant que lui resterait là.
FRENCH   Il donnait un coup d\'oeil au bureau de la vérification des factures, qui occupait vingt-cinq employés, choisis parmi les plus sérieux.
ENGLISH    \"Why yes! she has sweethearts in this very building.\"  Mouret found strength to smile.
FRENCH   On ne peut pas vous résister.
FRENCH   Elle répondit, en essayant de sourire:  -- Non, merci...
ENGLISH   \"No notice has been taken of your long service.
FRENCH    -- Comment va M.
ENGLISH   She would never have the courage to go through such another.
ENGLISH    \"Keep a good look-out, Monsieur Jouve,\" Bourdoncle kept saying to the inspector.
FRENCH   Il y avait là, au plein air de la rue, sur le trottoir même, un éboulement de marchandises à bon marché, la tentation de la porte, les occasions qui arrêtaient les clientes au passage.
FRENCH   Et, tout l\'après-midi, ils battirent les champs.
FRENCH   Quand j\'ai eu passé mon bachot, pour contenter ma famille, j\'aurais parfaitement pu devenir un avocat ou un médecin comme les camarades; mais ces métiers-là m\'ont fait peur, tant on voit de gens y tirer la langue...
FRENCH    -- Que diable! il y a temps pour tout; disait Baudu, qui, installé carrément, découpait un morceau de veau froid, avec une prudence et une adresse de patron, pesant les minces parts du coup d\'oeil, à un gramme près.
ENGLISH    They followed one of the narrow passages, where the gas was always kept burning.
FRENCH   Bourras sentait bien l\'étreinte dont craquait sa boutique.
FRENCH   Rien n\'est drôle.
FRENCH    Longtemps, il s\'était révolté, et parfois encore, il s\'indignait, il voulait se dégager de cette possession imbécile.
FRENCH   Celui-ci, pour se rapprocher de sa maîtresse, était venu demeurer rue Saint-Roch.
FRENCH    Elle s\'agenouilla devant elle, recommença à la sermonner.
ENGLISH    The last pale gleams of the heavens were dying away on the brass-work of the furniture.
ENGLISH   As he still felt very agitated, he sat down at the further end of the apartment, on a sofa; and his friend on seeing him so faint charitably came and stood before him, to conceal him from curious eyes.
FRENCH   Quand elle tiendrait la jeune fille au fond de sa chambre, elle trouverait bien le moyen d\'appeler Mouret; et elle agirait ensuite.
FRENCH   Deloche, heureux d\'être occupé, s\'était remis à vider les cartons devant la mère et la fille.
FRENCH   Il dut s\'avancer davantage, ces dames lui firent place au milieu d\'elles.
FRENCH   Vous n\'avez pas l\'habitude des chiffres.
ENGLISH    \"Is it possible? Speak frankly,\" said she.
ENGLISH   Others swear by the Bon Marché.
FRENCH   Elle avait écouté de tout son être, avec une passion muette qui la redressait.
FRENCH   Descendons voir la vente.
FRENCH    -- Dites donc, murmura Favier, en allant prendre un carton de velours dans une case, derrière Hutin, voilà Bouthemont qui vous fait votre particulière.
ENGLISH   But for the time being attention again flowed back to The Ladies\' Paradise, excited by all the stories which were flying about, occupied to a wonderful extent by these colossal establishments which by their importance were taking up such a large place in public life.
ENGLISH    \"I have the women, I don\'t care a hang for the rest!\" exclaimed Mouret, with a brutal frankness born of his passion.
FRENCH   Depuis des semaines, il était inquiet, agité d\'un tourment nerveux, qu\'il ne parvenait pas toujours à cacher; et son triomphe apportait un répit, une distraction dans sa souffrance.
FRENCH   Même elle y apportait une lutte de malice, elle se vantait de ne leur avoir jamais laissé un sou de gain.
FRENCH   C\'était une étroite cellule mansardée, ouvrant sur le toit par une fenêtre à tabatière, meublée d\'un petit lit, d\'une armoire de noyer, d\'une table de toilette et de deux chaises.
FRENCH   C\'était une pièce fermée par un vitrage à guichet de cuivre, dans laquelle on apercevait un énorme coffre-fort, scellé au mur.
FRENCH   Il y eut des saluts, Mouret prit congé, tandis que Vallagnosc, qui avait aperçu aux dentelles Mme de Boves et sa fille, se hâta d\'aller offrir son bras à la mère.
FRENCH   C\'était Pauline, qui, s\'échappant de son rayon sous un prétexte, venait causer un peu.
FRENCH    -- Donne-moi les quinze francs, ce sera la dernière fois, je te le jure...
ENGLISH   Here was the supreme temptation, the goading of a mad desire, which bewildered all the women.
FRENCH   Il cédait enfin à la séduction, la foi lui était venue, en le voyant au milieu de ces dames.
ENGLISH    \"Well! and your hussy?\" asked Hutin of Favier, when the latter returned from the pay-desk, whither he had accompanied the lady.
FRENCH    Alors, Denise put passer avec ses frères.
ENGLISH   Then appeared white petticoats of every length, the petticoat that clings to the knees, and the long petticoat which sweeps the pavement, a rising sea of petticoats, in which one lost oneself.
FRENCH   La découverte de Denise l\'emplit d\'une émotion douloureuse.
ENGLISH   What do they say?\"  \"Dear me! they say what I have said to you myself, and what I am still inclined to think.
ENGLISH   She always made a good many purchases, instructed a messenger to take them to her carriage, and then immediately disappeared.
ENGLISH   When she went on to speak of an advance of funds for her new protégé, the baron, though now never astonished at anything, could not restrain a gesture of bewilderment.
FRENCH    -- Ah! Dieu merci! murmura Mouret, vous êtes mieux, ce matin...
FRENCH   Et des personnes très distinguées.
FRENCH    Il hésitait, combattu, reculant devant la scène qu\'il prévoyait.
ENGLISH   The smell of the Saxon gloves--a savage smell resembling sugared musk--troubled her as a rule, but seated at this commonplace counter she did not notice it.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, calmez-vous.
FRENCH    -- C\'est un manteau de voyage que madame désire? demanda Denise à Mme Desforges, après lui avoir offert une chaise.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, comme l\'hôtel devait occuper seulement les terrains en bordure, le baron aurait pu quand même accueillir l\'idée de Mouret, traiter pour le reste du pâté de maisons, d\'une superficie très vaste encore.
ENGLISH   He could imagine it dominating, imposing itself as the giant palace of commerce, casting even a greater shadow over the city than the old Louvre itself.
ENGLISH   It was even feared that an attack of apoplexy would carry off Deslignières, who had been in a terrible rage ever since The Ladies\' Paradise had marked up purses at thirty per cent.
FRENCH   Et les étoffes vivaient, dans cette passion du trottoir: les dentelles avaient un frisson, retombaient et cachaient les profondeurs du magasin, d\'un air troublant de mystère; les pièces de drap elles-mêmes, épaisses et carrées, respiraient, soufflaient une haleine tentatrice; tandis que les paletots se cambraient davantage sur les mannequins qui prenaient une âme, et que le grand manteau de velours se gonflait, souple et tiède, comme sur des épaules de chair, avec les battements de la gorge et le frémissement des reins.
FRENCH   Maintenant, les rayons de l\'entresol s\'animaient, il dut se ranger pour laisser passer les dames qui, par petits groupes, montaient à la lingerie et aux confections; tandis que, derrière lui, aux dentelles et aux châles, il entendait voler de gros chiffres.
FRENCH   Cette offre redoubla la colère du vieillard, il refusa avec des injures.
ENGLISH   Soon afterwards his wife fell asleep still looking quite white, as if dead; while he still kept on tramping about.
FRENCH    Alors, Hutin s\'amusa de sa gêne.
FRENCH    Puis, se fâchant tout d\'un coup:  -- Mais, sacredieu; ils m\'ont donné de l\'âne!...
FRENCH   J\'y suis allée une fois, mais j\'étais bien petite...
FRENCH   Ses maigres bras, brûlés de la fièvre ardente des phtisiques, avaient un perpétuel mouvement de recherche anxieuse et inconsciente; tandis que ses cheveux noirs, lourds de passion, semblaient s\'être encore épaissis et mangeaient de leur vie vorace son pauvre visage, où agonisait la dégénérescence dernière d\'une longue famille poussée à l\'ombre, dans cette cave du vieux commerce parisien.
FRENCH    Tout de suite, le baron manoeuvra pour emmener Mouret, en abandonnant ces dames à Bouthemont et à Vallagnosc.
ENGLISH   Behind the curtain of falling rain, the vision, blurred and distant, assumed the appearance of a giant furnace-house, where the shadows of firemen passed black against the red glare of the furnaces.
ENGLISH   He came up another day, indeed got into the habit of coming to see her.
FRENCH   Vivement, elle se dirigea vers la direction.
ENGLISH    \"But wait a bit!\" resumed Baudu, seized with a sudden fit of anger, \"such jokers always go to smash! Mouret is hard-pushed just now; I know that for a fact.
ENGLISH    The same disorder prevailed upstairs, in the departments of the first floor: the furs were scattered over the flooring, the mantles were heaped up like the great-coats of soldiers _hors-de-combat_, the laces and the under-linen, unfolded, crumpled, thrown about everywhere, made you think of a nation of women who had disrobed themselves there; whilst down below, in the depths of the establishment, the delivery department, now in full activity, was still and ever disgorging the parcels which filled it to suffocation and which were carried off by the vans, in a last effort of the overheated machine.
FRENCH   Ensuite, il laissa entendre que Mme Sauveur achetait chez lui ses étoffes; sans doute, elle prenait directement chez les fabricants certains dessins, dont elle s\'assurait la propriété; mais, pour les soieries noires, par exemple, elle guettait les occasions du Bonheur des Dames, faisait des provisions considérables, qu\'elle écoulait en doublant et en triplant les prix.
ENGLISH   But he kept on thinking that he had offered Denise silks and velvets, anything she might like to take in no matter what quantity, from among these enormous heaps, and that she had refused his offer by a slight shake of her fair head.
FRENCH    Cependant, Bourdoncle avait pris une des pièces de soie, dont il examinait le grain d\'un air attentif d\'homme compétent.
FRENCH   En s\'abattant, la muraille ébranlait et emportait toute la ruine.
FRENCH   Hein? des calicots qui vendent des fourrures, c\'est trop drôle! Une idée du Mouret encore!  -- Et les gants, dit Mme Baudu.
ENGLISH    On the Sunday on which the Lhommes paid the money, they condescended to dine at The Old Elbeuf.
ENGLISH   It was Bourdoncle, the infallible and impeccable, whom he generally charged with the duty of reprimanding.
FRENCH   Depuis quinze jours, elle ne pouvait plus descendre à la boutique, qu\'une femme de journée gardait.
FRENCH   Au passage, chaque rayon l\'arrêtait.
ENGLISH   Jean lowered his voice.
ENGLISH   However, he raised his head, looked at her, and all at once got into the coach.
ENGLISH   The whole shop was shaken, and he would spend the entire afternoon without a customer of his own but amidst all the trepidation of the jostling multitude in The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   Ils vendent la leur cinq francs soixante, n\'est-ce pas? Et bien! ce sera deux sous de moins, et cela suffit, vous les coulerez.
FRENCH   Et la pensée de la boutique du Vieil Elbeuf, noire et étroite, agrandissait encore pour elle le vaste magasin, le lui montrait doré de lumière, pareil à une ville, avec ses monuments, ses places, ses rues, où il lui semblait impossible qu\'elle trouvât jamais sa route.
FRENCH   Elles se regardaient de nouveau, ne trouvant plus une phrase.
ENGLISH   The first time she understood them she turned quite pale at the monstrosity of their suppositions.
FRENCH   Déjà, la veille, il avait fait une démarche secrète auprès de Hutin, qui justement allait partir pour Lyon.
ENGLISH   Then he replied: \"But it would require an immense sum.
ENGLISH   We\'ll have another talk about it.\"  \"As you like,\" replied Vinçard, concealing his disappointment under a smiling countenance.
FRENCH   Foi d\'honnête homme! je rougirais d\'employer de tels moyens.
FRENCH    -- Comment ça?  -- Oui, M.
ENGLISH   I earned my own living before I was ten years old.\"  He made a wild gesture.
ENGLISH   A feeling of self-esteem prevented them from displaying their temper before these children, who had only that morning arrived.
ENGLISH   Two men had been scouring the neighbourhood for him; and the doorkeeper belonging to the house had now gone to seek him in his turn.
FRENCH   Ainsi, ne m\'a-t-on pas dit également que vous logiez chez ce Bourras?  -- Un bien digne homme, murmura-t-elle.
ENGLISH   \"Four ditto, first size, at two hundred and twenty!\"  The work once more commenced.
FRENCH   Tu ne peux donc pas être raisonnable? Il t\'arrive sans cesse des choses si drôles!  Il se frappa la poitrine.
ENGLISH    No one had ever called upon her till one afternoon when she was surprised by a knock.
ENGLISH    From that time forward Denise took an interest in the love-stories of the department.
FRENCH    -- Oh! par exemple! elle est très honnête, mon cher...
ENGLISH   Robineau replied by five francs three sous, whereupon Mouret at once ticketed The Paris Delight at five francs and two sous.
ENGLISH   The cups were steaming, perspiring faces shone under the light vapour, floating like bluey clouds from cigarettes.
FRENCH   Cette fois, la femme était la plus forte, et il attendait d\'être emporté dans le désastre.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, il n\'y a rien là-dedans de vilain...
ENGLISH    \"Send it to my house,\" said she rapidly, at a neighbouring pay-desk.
FRENCH   Cela suffisait à son amour timide, sans cesse il recommençait la même conversation, malgré lui, tremblant de la joie d\'être avec une femme qui avait approché Clara.
ENGLISH   The gentlemen, however, were examining the pattern of a mantle with Madame Frédéric and took no further notice of her.
ENGLISH    \"All right,\" he said at last.
FRENCH   Derrière le corbillard, Baudu marchait du même pas de boeuf assommé, dont il avait accompagné sa fille; tandis que, au fond de la première voiture de deuil, on apercevait les yeux étincelants de Bourras, sous les broussailles de ses sourcils et de ses cheveux, d\'un blanc de neige.
FRENCH    Quand il l\'eut arrêtée, il baissa la voix.
ENGLISH   The latter forgave her everything else; but the thought of her dying cousin Geneviève being finished off by such cruelty, exasperated her.
ENGLISH   Since Baudu\'s retirement into a home, The Old Elbeuf, on the other side of the way, had been closed, walled up like a tomb, behind the shutters that were never now taken down; little by little cab-wheels had splashed them, while posters--a rising tide of advertisements, which seemed like the last shovelful of earth thrown over old-fashioned commerce--covered them up and pasted them together; and, in the middle of this dead frontage, dirtied by the mud from the street, and streaked with tatters of Parisian puffery, a huge clean yellow poster, announcing in letters two feet high the great sale at The Ladies\' Paradise, was displayed like a flag planted on a conquered empire.
ENGLISH   It was clean and light, well fitted up in the modern style, but rather small, and contained but a poor stock.
FRENCH   Vous avez eu là une idée excellente.
FRENCH   Mouret, M.
ENGLISH   Below them, beneath the colossal iron framework, in the silk hall, was the roar of business, the trepidation of the machine at work; the entire house vibrated with the tramping of the crowd, the bustle of the salesmen, the life of the thirty thousand persons hurtling there; and they, carried away by their dreams, thought they could hear the wind passing over the grass and shaking the tall trees, as they detected this deep dull clamour with which the roofs were resounding.
FRENCH   Tandis que M.
ENGLISH    \"Of course, if it does not suit you, madame--\" resumed the first-hand.
FRENCH   C\'était la fin de la chair, un corps de fiancée usé dans l\'attente, retourné à l\'enfance grêle des premiers ans.
FRENCH   L\'idée de les faire surprendre lui vint brusquement, lorsqu\'il s\'aperçut que Deloche pleurait.
FRENCH   Qu\'on s\'écrase, tout ira bien!  Il riait, il daigna expliquer son idée, en baissant la voix:  -- Tenez! Bourdoncle, écoutez les résultats...
FRENCH   Dans les angles, il y avait des motifs compliqués, des étoiles faites d\'ombrelles à trente-neuf sous, dont les teintes claires, bleu pâle, blanc crème, rose tendre, brûlaient avec une douceur de veilleuse; tandis que, au-dessus, d\'immenses parasols japonais, où des grues couleur d\'or volaient dans un ciel de pourpre, flambaient avec des reflets d\'incendie.
ENGLISH   In falling, the wall shook and carried all the rest with it.
ENGLISH   Keep that to yourself, or they\'ll go on worse and worse.
ENGLISH   It\'s a lucky thing for you that we are mindful of your mother\'s good services!\"  However, at this moment Lhomme senior came running up.
ENGLISH   They took second-class tickets, and found the train full of a gay, noisy throng.
ENGLISH   Baron Hartmann, according to his promise, had managed to settle the matter at the last general meeting of the Crédit Immobilier.
FRENCH   Toutes les histoires contées par son oncle, revenaient à sa mémoire, grandissant Mouret, l\'entourant d\'une légende, faisant de lui le maître de la terrible machine, qui depuis le matin la tenait dans les dents de fer de ses engrenages.
ENGLISH   In one corner were the great machine knives, for cutting up the patterns.
ENGLISH    \"Let them alone!\" repeated Pauline, \"a lot of stuck-up things, as stupid as geese!\"  But it was just these fine-lady airs which intimidated Denise.
ENGLISH   Her name was pronounced, and she realized that they were talking about her adventure.
ENGLISH    In the mantle department, the young ladies were fast losing their heads.
FRENCH   Il n\'a jamais aimé Geneviève, il se serait enfui plus tôt, si vous aviez voulu hâter le mariage.
FRENCH   Au milieu de la débandade forcée de leur foyer, il s\'était fait dans la musique un désert.
ENGLISH   Good-bye, I\'m off.\"  However, a sound of footsteps at the end of the passage suddenly frightened them.
ENGLISH   Henriette could not restrain a movement of anger.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! Bourdoncle, cria Mouret, tremblez-vous encore?  Il était revenu à son poste favori, en haut de l\'escalier de l\'entresol, contre la rampe; et, devant le massacre d\'étoffes qui s\'étalait sous lui, il avait un rire victorieux.
FRENCH    Mouret se planta, seul et debout, au bord de la rampe du hall.
FRENCH   Puis, elle l\'interrogea.
FRENCH   Ce jour-là, serré dans une redingote noire, homme fait à cette heure et gagnant des journées de vingt francs, il semblait si digne et si triste, que sa soeur en fut frappée, car elle ne le soupçonnait pas d\'aimer à ce point leur cousine.
ENGLISH   She was mortified with herself for having carried matters too far, and bitterly tortured by jealousy.
ENGLISH   But he belongs to my part of the country.
ENGLISH    \"How are you, my dear? We never meet now----\"  As it was against the rules, however, to go up into the bed-rooms, and, above all, for two of the saleswomen to be shut in together, Denise took her friend to the end of the passage, to a saloon which Mouret had gallantly fitted up for the young ladies, who could spend their evenings there, chatting or sewing, till eleven o\'clock.
ENGLISH   In fact, she returned four articles out of every five, and was getting known at all the counters for the strange trafficking she carried on--a trafficking easily divined by the perpetual discontent which made her bring back her purchases one by one, after she had kept them several days.
FRENCH   Hier, nous avons eu beaucoup de peine à arriver.
ENGLISH   And Bourras went on, with a vague expression in his eyes, as if he were now dreaming aloud.
ENGLISH   He seemed to be a woman himself, they felt penetrated, overcome by the delicate sense of their secret passions which he possessed, and surrendered themselves to him quite captivated; whilst he, certain that he had them at his mercy, appeared like the despotic monarch of finery, enthroned above them all.
FRENCH   Comme vous êtes dure, de lui causer tant de peine! Voyons, expliquez-moi ça, puisque j\'ose aborder ce sujet.
FRENCH   Elle regarda Mouret, elle regarda Denise.
FRENCH   Juste devant elle, le Vieil Elbeuf, avec sa façade rouillée et ses vitrines mortes, lui parut si laid, si malheureux, vu ainsi du luxe et de la vie où elle se trouvait, qu\'une sorte de remords acheva de lui serrer le coeur.
FRENCH   Pourtant, comme on avait une heure encore avant de prendre le train, ils allèrent jusqu\'au bout de l\'île, ils suivirent la berge, sous les grands arbres; et, de temps à autre, ils se retournaient, ils murmuraient:  -- Où sont-ils donc? Ah! les voici...
ENGLISH   Madame Bourdelais examined the stuff.
FRENCH   Il est bien dans ma boutique, ce petit...
ENGLISH   And a grand fête was then given on the premises, a concert and a ball, to introduce the band of The Ladies\' Paradise to the customers and the whole world.
ENGLISH   Formerly she had struggled on for six months, amidst all the torments of drudgery, without disarming her comrades\' ill-will, but now in a few weeks she had overcome them, and saw them submissive and respectful around her.
FRENCH   On aurait vendu le double.
FRENCH   Un après-midi, elle y trouva Mouret qui semblait la suivre d\'un sourire.
FRENCH   Le ton de ce billet, à la fois familier et paternel, n\'avait rien de blessant; mais il lui était impossible de se méprendre, le Bonheur connaissait bien la signification vraie de ces invitations, une légende courait là- dessus: Clara avait dîné, d\'autres aussi, toutes celles que le patron remarquait.
FRENCH    Et Denise s\'en allait avec son argent, lorsqu\'elle rencontra enfin Robineau.
ENGLISH   The thought of Denise suddenly came upon him, that thought which incessantly pierced him with a flame, like the shooting of an incurable pain.
FRENCH   Ce sera moins solennel.
FRENCH   Il resta là quelques minutes, muet, souriant; et ses lèvres seules avaient un frisson de fièvre, dans son visage gai et victorieux des jours d\'inventaire.
FRENCH    Alors, il perdit la tête, il cria, secoué de colère contenue:  -- Eh bien! allez en face!  Du coup, elle se leva, très blessée, et elle s\'en alla, sans se retourner, en répondant:  -- C\'est ce que je vais faire, monsieur.
FRENCH    -- Voici nos derniers modèles, dit Denise.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s very wrong.\"  \"I?\" replied Liénard; \"but I only told it to one or two persons, enjoining secrecy.
ENGLISH   Of all the young ladies, one alone, Pauline Cugnot, showed her a little affection; and the mantle and under-clothing departments being close to one another, and in open war, the sympathy between the two saleswomen had hitherto been confined to a few rare words hastily exchanged.
FRENCH    -- Si le Bobin\'-Club a un piano, je crois bien! cria Mignot.
ENGLISH   He frequently had women there who diverted his attention from his work; and twice already Madame Aurélie had been obliged to plead for him.
FRENCH   Mlle Baudu est bien libre de se mal conduire dehors.
FRENCH    Elle avait donné à l\'aîné quatre mille francs, la moitié de ses économies, pour qu\'il pût installer son ménage.
FRENCH    Il jeta un dernier coup d\'oeil sur le tas des décombres, puis s\'en alla, péniblement.
FRENCH   Elle baissait les yeux, devant cette enfant toujours muette, et qui devinait tout.
ENGLISH   \"The scoundrels have taken away my profits; but if I\'m making nothing I\'m not losing anything yet, or at least only a trifle.
ENGLISH    \"If Monsieur Mouret is not satisfied, I should like to know what more he wants,\" added the first-hand.
ENGLISH   \"Keep your wicked conduct to yourself.
ENGLISH   In the night I get up to drink.\"  Silence again fell.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s Bourras,\" all at once said a voice behind her.
FRENCH   Est-ce que vous connaissez?  -- Oui, oui, répondait lentement Denise, les regards au loin.
ENGLISH   On the death of the elder, his daughter, Caroline, had married the son of a linen manufacturer, Charles Hédouin; and, later on, becoming a widow, she had married Mouret.
ENGLISH   \"I should have been sure then.\"  \"Well,\" said he, with a good-natured laugh, \"it isn\'t my fault if he escapes so frequently now.
FRENCH    By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
FRENCH    -- Non, je ne suis pas décidé, finit-il par conclure.
FRENCH    Son geste acheva la phrase.
ENGLISH   And it was especially Favier whom he strove to excite against the \"second\"--Favier, who stood next to himself as salesman, and who appeared willing to be led, though he had certain brusque fits of reserve by which one could divine that he was bent on some private campaign of his own.
ENGLISH   The number of departments now amounted to the enormous total of fifty; several, quite fresh, were being inaugurated that very day; others, which had become too important, had simply been divided, in order to facilitate the sales; and, owing to the continual increase of business, the staff had been increased to three thousand and forty-five employees for the new season.
ENGLISH    \"Joseph is somewhat absent-minded,\" murmured Clara.
FRENCH    -- Vous voilà donc!...
ENGLISH   \"A silk at five francs twelve sous will never equal one at fifteen, or even ten.\"  \"It is very light,\" repeated Madame Marty.
ENGLISH   Your visit will please him, and he\'s not the man to display any rancour, if you offer him even a centime profit per yard.\"  Madame Baudu died one bright sunny afternoon in January.
FRENCH   Hors d\'haleine, l\'inspecteur, qui arrivait, distingua seulement un coin de la blouse blanche et les boucles des cheveux blonds, envolés dans le vent du trottoir.
ENGLISH    \"You wished to see me, sir,\" she said in her calm voice.
FRENCH   Ils réussissent, c\'est vrai.
ENGLISH   And so he hasn\'t a sou to help himself with now; and, unless a miracle be worked, and he manages to treble his sales, as he hopes to do, you\'ll see what a crash there\'ll be! Ah! I\'m not ill-natured, but that day I\'ll illuminate my shop-front, I will, on my word of honour!\"  And he went on in a revengeful voice; to hear him you would have thought that the fall of The Ladies\' Paradise would restore the dignity and prestige of commerce.
ENGLISH   \"Ask them if they like your Ladies\' Paradise.\"  Side by side in the places where they had found themselves twice a-day for the last twelve years, Colomban and Geneviève were eating slowly, without uttering a word.
FRENCH   Favier s\'était fait quinze francs, Hutin n\'avait pu arriver qu\'à treize, battu ce jour-là, enragé de sa mauvaise chance.
FRENCH   Quand on a des cheveux comme ça, est-ce qu\'on est si bête? Venez donc ce soir, c\'est pour rire.
FRENCH   Alors, il l\'envoya carrément au diable, avec une brutalité qu\'il ne ménageait pas même à ses hauts employés, dans les heures mauvaises.
FRENCH   Ensuite, l\'après-midi, lorsque Denise alla chercher Pépé chez Mme Gras, celle-ci lui déclara qu\'il devenait trop grand pour qu\'elle le gardât davantage; encore un tracas, il faudrait trouver un collège, éloigner l\'enfant peut-être.
FRENCH   De l\'application de Bruxelles, ma chère...
FRENCH   De toutes les rues, éclairées d\'un petit jour pâle sous le ciel de cendre, les commis débouchaient vivement, le collet de leur paletot relevé, les mains dans les poches, surpris par ce premier frisson de l\'hiver.
ENGLISH   The architect, who came with his gang of workmen, had been obliged to employ the police to get him out.
FRENCH   Robineau, quand il se livrait à ce calcul devant Denise, après le repas, restait un instant accablé, les yeux sur son assiette vide: elle avait raison, c\'était ce renouvellement incessant du capital qui faisait la force invincible du nouveau commerce.
FRENCH   L\'étoffe est la même.
ENGLISH   For a moment Baudu remained shaking his head in silence, and then crossed the street to his shop, his legs almost failing him as he repeated: \"Ah! good Lord! ah! good Lord!\"  Denise, who had listened, followed her uncle.
FRENCH   Et la catastrophe était venue, personne au monde ne l\'empêcherait maintenant.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, il était à bout de courage.
FRENCH   Sur la table ovale, placée au milieu, les quinze couverts s\'espaçaient davantage, et le vin était dans des carafes; un plat de raie et un plat de boeuf à la sauce piquante tenaient les deux bouts.
FRENCH   Elle, chétive pour ses vingt ans, l\'air pauvre, portait un léger paquet; tandis que, de l\'autre côté, le petit frère, âgé de cinq ans, se pendait à son bras, et que, derrière son épaule, le grand frère, dont les seize ans superbes florissaient, était debout, les mains ballantes.
FRENCH   Est-ce qu\'il allait manquer la bonne amie du patron, dont il avait juré de tirer cent sous? Ce serait le comble de la malchance, car il ne s\'était pas encore fait trois francs, avec tous ces autres chignons qui traînaient!  Bouthemont, justement, répétait très haut:  -- Voyons, messieurs, quelqu\'un par ici!  Alors, Hutin passa Mme Boutarel à Robineau inoccupé.
FRENCH   Il n\'y a que de l\'herbe, chacun enferme son morceau avec des aubépines et des ormes, et l\'on est chez soi, et c\'est tout vert, oh! d\'un vert qu\'ils n\'ont pas à Paris...
ENGLISH   Further on stood one of the three hot-air stoves; further still, was a post of firemen guarding the main gas-meter, enclosed in its iron cage.
ENGLISH   She found him standing, waiting for her.
FRENCH   Dès lors, éclataient un bruit assourdissant de dominos, des rires, des voix glapissantes, au milieu de la fumée épaisse des pipes.
ENGLISH   Still the panic lasted several days longer, for after this scene Mouret wandered from one end of the establishment to the other, with a terrible expression, venting his anger on all those who dared even to raise their eyes.
FRENCH   Phrase à phrase, il finit par obtenir l\'histoire de Paul, l\'histoire commune des garçons pauvres, qui croient devoir à leur naissance de rester dans les professions libérales, et qui s\'enterrent au fond d\'une médiocrité vaniteuse, heureux encore quand ils ne crèvent pas la faim, avec des diplômes plein leurs tiroirs.
ENGLISH   Hadn\'t she bought three pairs of boots all at the same time, and thrown them away the next day, after slashing them with her scissors, on account of her feet, which were covered with corns? In fact, the young ladies were just as bad as the young men, they squandered everything, never saving a sou, but wasting two or three hundred francs a month on dress and dainties.
FRENCH   Tout cela s\'empilait sur la chaise, les paquets montaient, faisaient craquer le bois; et les vendeurs qui se succédaient, s\'attelaient avec plus de peine, à mesure que la charge devenait plus lourde.
ENGLISH   Then, at last they arrived at Joinville, and went straight to the island to order lunch; and afterwards lingered there, strolling along, under the tall poplars beside the Marne.
FRENCH   Et, devant Robineau, sa joie de leur avoir mis sur les épaules une mauvaise affaire dont il désespérait de se débarrasser, élargissait encore sa face aux yeux ronds et à la grande bouche loyale, qui crevait de santé.
FRENCH   Cassez-moi tout ça et vite!  Il ne voulut rien entendre, une équipe de garçons dut remanier l\'exposition des ombrelles.
FRENCH   L\'inspecteur Jouve, heureusement, vint à leur secours.
ENGLISH   Baugé was to come and fetch them at eight o\'clock, on the Place Gaillon; whence they would take a cab to the Vincennes Station.
ENGLISH   Every one gave way to Madame Aurélie, when she thought it expedient to assert her authority.
ENGLISH    \"Certainly, madame,\" replied Mouret, in a flute-like voice, an actor\'s voice, which he assumed when speaking to women.
FRENCH   Nous te disons les choses, voilà tout...
FRENCH    Alors, elle reprit avec gaieté:  -- C\'est cela, monsieur.
FRENCH   On avait changé le rayon en une chapelle blanche.
FRENCH    La jeune fille comprit au sourire et au ton de tendre curiosité.
ENGLISH   Little by little, however, they were caught by the stream and only had to yield to the current to pass the door without being conscious of it, talking louder the while in order to make themselves heard.
ENGLISH   An idea, however, was growing amidst his wild projects, and gradually imposing itself on him notwithstanding his revolt.
FRENCH    In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
FRENCH    Elles ne l\'interrompaient plus, elles resserraient encore leur cercle, la bouche entrouverte par un vague sourire, le visage rapproché et tendu, comme dans un élancement de tout leur être vers le tentateur.
FRENCH   C\'était un aveu qu\'elle avait dû se faire, dans cette chambre même, aux heures d\'insomnie: si elle tremblait encore quand il passait, elle savait maintenant que ce n\'était pas de crainte; et son malaise d\'autrefois, son ancienne peur ne pouvait être que l\'ignorance effarée de l\'amour, le trouble de ses tendresses naissantes, dans sa sauvagerie d\'enfant.
FRENCH    -- Si la police ne devrait pas débarrasser la voie publique!...
ENGLISH   Denise\'s discovery filled her with painful emotion.
FRENCH   Ah! çà, que chantes-tu? Tu en es là, mon vieux!...
ENGLISH   \"But answer me! who is this woman? I swear I\'ll send for the police commissary, if you don\'t tell me the truth.\"  The woman had been taken away, and two saleswomen were searching her.
ENGLISH   She could not be occupied in any matter or see any work going on, without being moved by a desire to introduce some improvement into the mechanism.
FRENCH    Mouret, chaque matin, lorsqu\'il faisait avec Bourdoncle son inspection, prenait à part les chefs de comptoir, qu\'il avait poussés, l\'hiver, pour que la vente ne souffrît pas, à engager plus de vendeurs qu\'il ne leur en fallait, quitte à écrémer ensuite leur personnel.
ENGLISH   Yes, I should have been happy to have told you sooner how much I regret the error that was made.
FRENCH   Cependant, les voitures du Bonheur, les grandes lettres d\'or des enseignes, les bannières hissées en plein ciel, flambaient toujours au reflet de l\'incendie du couchant, si colossales dans cet éclairage oblique, qu\'elles évoquaient le monstre des réclames, le phalanstère dont les ailes, multipliées sans cesse, dévoraient les quartiers, jusqu\'aux bois lointains de la banlieue.
ENGLISH   Favier never made much more than eight, and yet now that animal was literally taking the bread out of his mouth, for he had just sold another dress.
ENGLISH   \"An advertisement! an advertisement! In any case this one would be in stone, and outlive all of us.
ENGLISH   But when he saw Denise, his face relaxed and he passed by with an amiable smile.
FRENCH   Mais tu tombes là, sans crier gare...
ENGLISH   She blushed with pleasure, at each fresh article she took out.
FRENCH   Mon Dieu! quelle drôle de femme vous êtes!  Et elle dut consoler Denise, qui était retombée la tête sur le traversin, sanglotant, répétant qu\'elle finirait par s\'en aller, puisqu\'on lui prêtait sans cesse toutes sortes d\'histoires, qui ne pouvaient seulement lui entrer dans le crâne.
ENGLISH   Every time she came into the director\'s office her eyes were sure to meet those of that painted lady.
FRENCH   Surtout, comprends bien ma position.
FRENCH    Il resta saisi, n\'étant pas habitué à de pareilles défaites.
FRENCH   Ils traversèrent de nouveau le service du départ, ils arrivèrent au pied de l\'escalier dont la cage vitrée débouchait sur la rue de la Michodière.
ENGLISH   Anything you might ask of me, anything you might require of me----\"  But with a word, she stopped him: \"Thanks, I now earn more than I need.\"  \"But it\'s perfect liberty that I am offering you, an existence of pleasure and luxury.
ENGLISH    \"Really, I don\'t understand you,\" repeated Mouret.
FRENCH    Jamais Denise n\'avait éprouvé un embarras pareil.
ENGLISH   \"Very good, sir; we will look into the matter.
FRENCH    Des voix légères venaient du grand salon, assourdies par les tentures.
FRENCH   Le roulement des voitures, qui ébranlait par instants les dalles, passait comme une batterie funèbre de tambours, dans l\'air immobile, étouffé sous le plafond bas.
FRENCH    Et il reprit sa course, après l\'avoir baisée sur les joues comme un fou.
FRENCH   Et ceux qui lisaient, restaient silencieux, enfoncés dans le feuilleton de leur journal, ne sachant même pas ce qu\'ils mangeaient.
ENGLISH   A broad sheet of light streamed along the grand central gallery, showing up the staircases, the flying bridges, all the network of suspended iron.
ENGLISH    \"Monsieur Robineau has gone out to match some goods,\" said he.
FRENCH   Ce matin, M.
FRENCH    Et, se tournant, elle ajouta de son air gai:  -- Entrez donc, monsieur Mouret, passez par le petit salon.
FRENCH    On l\'interrompit avec des rires, on ne causa plus que de la direction.
FRENCH   Elle revint à gauche, s\'arrêta au blanc, pour prendre des torchons; puis, elle fit le tour, poussa jusqu\'aux lainages, au fond de la galerie.
ENGLISH   \"Yes, my dear fellow, at supper.
ENGLISH   Then until lunch-time the three women sat and talked together about children, housekeeping, life in Paris and life in the country, in curt, cautious sentences, like relations whom ignorance of one another renders somewhat awkward.
FRENCH   Et, au milieu de ce vide, Hutin et Favier feuilletaient leurs cahiers de débit, calculaient leur tant pour cent, essoufflés de la lutte.
ENGLISH   Come! the duel was finished, Henriette was decidedly beaten, she certainly was not the woman who was to avenge all the others.
ENGLISH   She undid her dress, and was heart-rent on seeing how fearfully thin she had become.
FRENCH   Maintenant, elle s\'y regardait près de Denise, elle établissait des comparaisons.
FRENCH   Tant pis pour le vieux fou! Et il rappelait ses offres, il lui avait proposé jusqu\'à cent mille francs.
FRENCH   Du coup, Bourras faillit avoir une attaque.
FRENCH    Mais il aperçut Denise.
ENGLISH   \"I\'ve notified the position to the directors, and am going to speak about it shortly.\"  The second lunch was being rung; the clang of a bell came up from the basement with a distant muffled sound in the close air of the shop.
ENGLISH   What did she want? He dared not offer her money now; but the confused idea of marriage presented itself amidst his revolts.
FRENCH    -- Non! non!  La salle à manger demeurait vide, le garçon n\'avait point reparu.
FRENCH    -- Et vous, madame, ne désirez-vous pas voir nos satins, nos velours?...
ENGLISH   On the first-floor the mantle, perfumery, lace, and shawl employees were ranged devoutly as for the passage of the Blessed Sacrament.
ENGLISH   To think of it! A chap who had always appeared so cold, so humble, whom he had made such use of to turn out both Robineau and Bouthemont! He was full of mingled surprise and respect.
FRENCH   Ensuite, il apporta le café; et ceux qui en prenaient, lui donnaient tout de suite leurs trois sous.
FRENCH   Il grondait, déclarait ce diable de Baudu joliment solide, pour aller quand même, après de tels coups sur le crâne.
ENGLISH   Baudu and Colomban went to speak to a traveller, who had come for orders.
ENGLISH   Madame Aurélie addressed her severely:  \"Well, you\'re doing nothing now, eh? only looking at the people passing? Things can\'t go on like this, you know!\"  \"But since I\'m not allowed to sell, madame?\"  \"Oh, there\'s other work for you, mademoiselle! Begin at the beginning.
FRENCH   Par moments, passait un inspecteur, l\'air cérémonieux, raidi dans sa cravate blanche.
FRENCH   Derrière Marguerite, trois vendeuses vidaient les armoires, classaient les articles, les lui donnaient par paquets; et, quand elle les avait appelés, elle les jetait sur les tables, où ils s\'entassaient peu à peu, en piles énormes.
FRENCH    -- Ne vous inquiétez pas, répétait Denise machinalement, sanglotant elle aussi.
FRENCH    Quand il eut conclu le marché avec un petit jeune homme mince, il tenta aussi de vendre son vin; mais personne n\'en voulut, on le trouvait exécrable.
ENGLISH   Then, when she had seen enough, she remarked:  \"Oh! after all, the first is the best; it\'s for my cook.
FRENCH   La jeune femme avait déjà la carrure de sa mère, la chair soufflée et comme épaissie par le mariage.
FRENCH   Vinçard a créé une spécialité de soie, où il fait encore des affaires.
FRENCH   Tu travailleras quand même, tu verras comme ce sera bon encore.
FRENCH   Je suis furieuse...
ENGLISH   She only wanted one saleswoman, and she already had ten applications.
FRENCH   Tant que l\'entrée d\'honneur se trouverait rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, dans une rue noire du vieux Paris, son oeuvre demeurait infirme, manquait de logique; il la voulait afficher devant le nouveau Paris, sur une de ces jeunes avenues où passait au grand soleil la cohue de la fin du siècle; il la voyait dominer, s\'imposer comme le palais géant du commerce, jeter plus d\'ombre sur la ville que le vieux Louvre.
FRENCH   Le caissier et son fils se déchargèrent.
FRENCH   Coup sur coup, deux autres courtiers le volèrent; un troisième, honnête homme, ne faisait rien.
ENGLISH    Denise handed them over, and sat there with her eyes raised.
FRENCH   Puis, on verrait.
FRENCH   Mais la voilà debout, là-bas, avec Mlle Blanche.
ENGLISH   When he saw his wife big tears ran down his cheeks.
ENGLISH   Everything went by steam, screeching whistles rent the air; and then too, at the slightest gust of wind, clouds of plaster flew about and covered the neighbouring roofs like a fall of snow.
FRENCH   Il éprouvait une lassitude, presque un regret, de s\'être ainsi soulagé une fois de plus.
ENGLISH    The dining-room remained empty, the waiter had not come back.
ENGLISH   On going in she did not close the door, which remained wide open.
ENGLISH    Denise trembled whenever he burst out thus: \"Art is done for, I tell you! There\'s not a single respectable handle made nowadays.
ENGLISH   She preferred this, however, notwithstanding the darkness reigning in the galleries.
ENGLISH   Bourras having quietly told her not to answer, she buried her face under her pillow to escape hearing their oaths.
FRENCH    -- Si vous désirez qu\'on vous le serve...
FRENCH   Depuis qu\'on avait fixé son mariage, elle promenait sa face de lait tourné, avec des mines plus dégoûtées encore.
ENGLISH   10; that\'s Albert, isn\'t it? We\'ll just say two words to him.\"  However, before starting on a tour round the shops, he wanted to go up to the postal order department, which occupied several rooms on the second floor.
FRENCH    Cette remarque fit intervenir le vendeur.
FRENCH    Il était encore dans la grosse douleur de son sacrifice, il gardait une rancune contre ces gens qui lui avaient acheté son rêve.
ENGLISH   \"I can\'t think what makes the old man grin as he does when he sees us together.
ENGLISH   He had understood, for he often questioned Pauline; each day they spoke of their common friend, and Mouret\'s passion for her.
ENGLISH   This was always the way; he addressed crafty reports to the directors, taking advantage of every opportunity to have the first-hand caught doing something wrong.
FRENCH    -- Oui, expliqua celle-ci, il fait beau, et comme mon médecin veut toujours que je marche...
FRENCH   Autour d\'eux, sur des étagères d\'une élégance frêle, les soies, pliées dans de longues chemises de papier crème, s\'entassaient comme des brochures de format inusité.
FRENCH    Bien qu\'elle connût déjà la nouvelle installation, Mme Desforges s\'était arrêtée, saisie par la vie ardente qui animait ce jour-là l\'immense nef.
ENGLISH   She tried to console him, and in their friendly effusion they found they belonged to the same part of the country--she to Valognes, he to Briquebec, eight miles from each other, and this proved a fresh tie.
FRENCH   Mme Desforges ne voyait de toutes parts que les grandes pancartes, aux chiffres énormes, dont les taches crues se détachaient sur les indiennes vives, les soies luisantes, les lainages sombres.
ENGLISH   Really Jean could not think much about the little one, or he would not be so foolish.
FRENCH    -- La mercerie, mesdames? dit-il obligeamment, allez à gauche, tenez! là-bas, derrière la bonneterie.
FRENCH    Il continua son inspection, désespéré.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! où sont-elles donc? s\'écria Mme Bourdelais, lorsqu\'elle se dégagea de la cohue, après avoir essuyé les enfants avec son mouchoir.
FRENCH    -- Tu es trop bête! finit-elle par dire en riant.
ENGLISH   Seen through the hazy windows, the lights swarmed vaguely, revealing a confused factory-like interior.
ENGLISH   Denise had now got into one of the coaches, being agitated by such poignant doubts, her heart oppressed by such cruel grief, that she had not the strength to walk further.
FRENCH    Plusieurs fois déjà, Denise avait trouvé Deloche qui l\'attendait.
FRENCH   Comme il n\'ignorait pas les rapports mondains du directeur avec la voleuse, il montra lui aussi une politesse parfaite.
ENGLISH   Each time a customer entered, there was a movement amongst the shop messengers, who dressed in livery consisting of a light green coat and trousers, and red and yellow striped waistcoat were drawn up under the lofty doorway.
FRENCH    -- Mais pourquoi, monsieur?  -- Veuillez me suivre, madame, répéta l\'inspecteur, sans élever le ton.
FRENCH   L\'avenir est à nous.
FRENCH   Les rues se succédaient, la rue des Moulins, la rue Sainte-Anne.
ENGLISH   Denise, again left to herself, sat down near the door waiting until her uncle should be able to take her to Vinçard\'s.
ENGLISH   He was supposed, in fact, to look after their dining-rooms.
FRENCH   Les glaces de l\'armoire reflétaient de larges pans de clarté vive sur les tentures de soie rouge, où dansaient les ombres des deux femmes.
ENGLISH   On their laps there was a continual caress of this wondrously delicate tissue amidst which their guilty fingers fondly lingered.
ENGLISH   Then she went over to her uncle\'s.
ENGLISH   None of them, in fact, tried to find out, although every time she made her appearance they all indulged in suppositions just for something to talk about.
FRENCH   Puis, comme ils n\'ajoutaient rien et qu\'ils se gênaient de plus en plus, ils se séparèrent gauchement, ils recommencèrent à attendre chacun de son côté, à quelques pas l\'un de l\'autre.
ENGLISH    All the morning this crush went on increasing.
ENGLISH   However, as there was still an hour before the train started, they went to the end of the island, following the bank, under the tall poplars; and, from time to time, they turned round, murmuring: \"But where have they got to? Ah, there they are.
ENGLISH   Leave us to talk together.\"  The infirmary was a long, light room, containing twelve beds with white curtains.
ENGLISH   \"There we really love our customers.\"  All the women present were of his opinion.
ENGLISH   This was the lowest work, generally performed by beginners.
FRENCH    -- Ah! non, par exemple! s\'écria Henriette, avec un mouvement de recul, je ne veux pas être de la noce.
FRENCH   La porte, ouverte, semblait donner sur les ténèbres humides d\'une cave.
FRENCH   Je me moque des autres, de simples rencontres, des hasards d\'un jour!  Elle parla de Clara avec dédain.
FRENCH   Puis, la vue de Pépé endormi sur la chaise, au milieu des éclats de la discussion, sembla l\'attendrir.
FRENCH   De place en place, les halls élargissaient des carrefours, au milieu de la charpente métallique des escaliers suspendus et des ponts volants.
FRENCH   Ah! je lui ai assez conseillé, dans mes lettres, de ne pas prendre cette teinturerie! Un brave coeur, mais pas deux liards de tête!...
FRENCH   Vous devez savoir, je le sens.
FRENCH   Sans doute, cette petite s\'était faite à l\'air de Paris, la voilà qui devenait femme, et elle était troublante, si raisonnable, avec ses beaux cheveux, lourds de tendresse.
ENGLISH   Favier and two shopmen, mounted on stools, were emptying the shelves and passing the pieces of stuff to Hutin who, standing on a table, called out the figures, after consulting the tickets; and he then dropped the pieces on to the floor over which they spread, rising slowly like an autumn tide.
ENGLISH   Both were returning to the gallery when Madame de Boves came out of Bourdoncle\'s office.
FRENCH    -- Je suis très touchée, monsieur, de votre bonté pour moi, et je vous remercie de cette invitation.
FRENCH    Le baron Hartmann eut une courte hésitation, puis il nia.
FRENCH   Tant mieux! tant mieux!...
ENGLISH   Just at that moment Madame Aurélie was scolding Denise.
FRENCH   Cependant, Pépé dormait si bien, qu\'on l\'allongea sur des pièces de molleton.
ENGLISH    \"Does madame require a cheap pair of garters?\" asked a salesman of Madame Desforges on seeing her standing still.
FRENCH   Et il était galopé de fièvre, il craignait de salir, il s\'engouffrait davantage, dans ce commerce luxueux, auquel il ne comprenait rien.
ENGLISH   And such a success! Have you seen the oriental saloon?\"  \"Superb--wonderful!\"  Thereupon, amidst all the jostling, pushed hither and thither by the growing crowd of modest purses rushing upon the cheap woollen goods, they went into ecstasies over the exhibition of Eastern carpets.
ENGLISH   They were weighed, and then shot down a rapid slide, whose oak and iron work was polished by the constant chaffing of bales and cases.
ENGLISH    \"Oh,\" she murmured, passing the fan to Madame de Boves, \"I\'ve scarcely bought one in my life.
FRENCH   Impossible de prendre sur la pension de Pépé, payée depuis deux jours.
FRENCH    Toutes deux causèrent de la partie de Rambouillet.
FRENCH   Vous comprenez?  Il était devenu rouge.
FRENCH   Il avait distribué des languettes de brie, et pour fêter ses parents, il demanda un second dessert, un pot de confiture de groseilles, largesse qui parut surprendre Colomban.
ENGLISH   \"No, I know it\'s all over! I don\'t say anything, because I see papa crying, and I don\'t wish to make mamma worse than she is.
FRENCH   Puis, Mme Marty expliqua qu\'elle cherchait une étoffe pour un manteau; mais elle n\'était pas fixée, elle avait voulu se faire montrer du matelassé de laine.
ENGLISH    Meantime, a few cabs were arriving and forming in line.
ENGLISH   \'Tis true that I wrote to you, but that was a year ago, and since then business hasn\'t been flourishing, I can assure you, my girl.\"  He stopped short, choked by an emotion he did not wish to show.
ENGLISH   He carved the knobs with charming ingenuity, continually inventing fresh designs, flowers, fruit, animals, and heads, all executed in a free and life-like style.
FRENCH   Pas plus que les autres, il ne comprenait, et ses regards suivaient le directeur d\'un air d\'inquiétude.
ENGLISH    \"Look here, Monsieur le Baron,\" said he, \"as I have the unexpected honour of meeting you, I must make a confession.
FRENCH   Un de ses tourments secrets était de voir cette clientèle le quitter lentement, retourner au Bonheur, après l\'argent perdu et les efforts qu\'il avait faits pour la conquérir.
FRENCH   Mais toi, ma fille, tu ne manges pas? ...
ENGLISH   And my brothers? I have sworn not to marry.
FRENCH   Vous êtes toujours pressée...
ENGLISH   Blinded by the clear outdoor light, they blinked as on the threshold of some unknown pit, and felt their way with their feet with an instinctive fear of encountering some treacherous step.
ENGLISH   In the mechanical working of The Ladies\' Paradise, this staircase in the Rue de la Michodière was ever disgorging the goods devoured by the slide in the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, after they had passed through the mill of the counters up above.
ENGLISH   Two thousand luncheons and two thousand dinners had to be served, and the number of employees was increasing every week.
ENGLISH   In the distance Madame Desforges could perceive some corners of the lateral galleries, just as from the top of a steeple one perceives the corners of neighbouring streets, with black specks of passers-by moving about.
FRENCH    -- Moi, je vous ai cherchée.
FRENCH   Comme la fenêtre donnait sur la cour, il y faisait déjà sombre; et l\'on avait allumé deux becs de gaz, dont les bras nickelés s\'allongeaient, à droite et à gauche de l\'armoire.
ENGLISH   In any case, the former spoke of their neighbours with the shocked air of respectable women; and facts proved that they were right, for it had been remarked that the silk dresses appeared to lead to dissolute habits among the young ladies who wore them.
FRENCH   Le chic n\'était plus d\'aller faire du boucan à Bullier, de rouler les café-concerts pour y siffler les chanteuses laides.
ENGLISH   And she, perceiving the increasing wildness of his look, wanted to catch up the veil, cravat and handkerchief and put them out of sight, moving her feverish hands about and repeating with forced laughter: \"You\'ll get me a scolding from my husband.
ENGLISH    When she had succeeded in getting her boots on she tried to walk across the room; but was obliged to lean against the furniture, being still rather lame.
ENGLISH   The dead season had steeped the vast basement in a sort of torpor, in the pale light falling from the air-holes.
ENGLISH   He began to flatter her and run down the house; he had had enough of it, and preferred to go away rather than remain a witness of such disorder.
FRENCH   Lui, si net, si logique, sans passion, sans chute possible, en était encore à comprendre le côté fille du succès, Paris se donnant dans un baiser au plus hardi.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! By the way, how did you get on at Vinçard\'s?\" inquired Madame Baudu.
ENGLISH   She had noticed Colomban\'s lackadaisical passion, and took it into her head to joke about the Baudus.
FRENCH    La dernière phrase de Liénard rappelait une scène qui s\'était passée la veille, au Café Saint-Roch.
ENGLISH   For a moment he had been watching her acting the mother towards the two big boys, scolding and embracing them and turning them round as mothers do babies when changing their clothes.
ENGLISH   The laces alone retained a snowy reflection against the dark dresses of the ladies, who in a confused group around the young man had a vague appearance of kneeling, worshipping women.
FRENCH   Puis, les lits craquaient, il y avait des bâillements; et les chambres tombaient à un lourd sommeil.
FRENCH    -- Bah! murmura-t-il, la vie ne vaut pas tant de peine.
ENGLISH   She was especially anxious about her aunt, who had fallen into a dull stupor ever since Geneviève\'s death; it seemed as if her life was quitting her hourly; though, when people questioned her, she would reply with an astonished air that she was not suffering, but simply felt as if overcome by sleep.
FRENCH   Et le patron redevenait enfant, glissait à un mariage imbécile, allait tuer sa chance, gâter son charme sur la clientèle.
ENGLISH    At last Madame Robineau recovered her speech.
FRENCH    -- D\'ailleurs, conclut le jeune homme, il faudrait des millions.
FRENCH    -- Ma tête sous le couteau, je ne l\'aurais pas cru!...
FRENCH   C\'était là, le sang aux yeux, la bouche contractée, mis hors de lui par les étalages du Bonheur des Dames, lorsque la vue de la jeune fille et de ses frères avait achevé de l\'exaspérer.
FRENCH   Vous la verrez, mesdames.
ENGLISH   At last she stammered out her request, but was obliged to repeat it to make herself understood.
FRENCH   Un lourd soleil chauffait les vitrages, et malgré les stores de toile grise, la chaleur tombait dans l\'air immobile.
ENGLISH   \"Everybody hasn\'t got such a mane as that!\"  And thereupon she returned to her place, leaving the two others crestfallen.
ENGLISH   As a rule, she was very careless and idle, not caring about the money she earned in the shop, as she could get plenty outside.
ENGLISH   Geneviève was the only one now left at home.
ENGLISH   Serve her right!\"  But Pauline protested.
ENGLISH    But she promptly regretted these words on seeing the Baudus near her.
ENGLISH    \"See how you have been treated at The Paradise,\" said he.
ENGLISH   Baudu, himself suffering from the same obsession, from the despairing fixity of her gaze, sometimes wanted to draw the larger curtains.
FRENCH   Madame se trompait sans doute, cet article-là aurait dû être vendu six francs cinquante, il était impossible qu\'on le donnât à cinq francs.
ENGLISH   The heavy silence, broken by distant breathing, moreover increased the darkness.
FRENCH   Elles n\'avançaient que très lentement, serrées à perdre haleine, tenues debout par des épaules et des ventres, dont elles sentaient la molle chaleur; et leur désir satisfait jouissait de cette approche pénible, qui fouettait davantage leur curiosité.
ENGLISH   10, for Madame Desforges.\"  Being a constant customer, she gave her name at a pay-desk, and had each purchase sent there without requiring a shopman to follow her.
FRENCH    Henriette l\'interrompit en riant.
ENGLISH   The young girl\'s name passed from mouth to mouth and the salesmen arched their backs and winked.
ENGLISH    Denise looked round for her brother Jean, and at last perceived him standing before Bourras\'s shop; whereupon she crossed over and asked him to walk with his uncle, and assist him should he be unable to get along.
FRENCH    Mais, en tournant la tête, elle le retrouva les yeux ouverts; et elle continua, de sa voix bégayante:  -- Oh! mon chéri, pourquoi as-tu fait cela?...
ENGLISH   But the sight of the galleries on the ground-floor especially reassured him.
FRENCH   En haut, dans un coin du plafond de son ancienne chambre, elle apercevait encore le nom en lettres noires et tremblées: Ernestine, écrit avec la flamme d\'une chandelle; et le souvenir des jours de misère lui revenait, plein d\'un attendrissement pour toutes les douleurs.
ENGLISH   It was this falling mountain of goods which he must cast to the four corners of Paris.
FRENCH   Clara elle-même, travaillée d\'un sourd respect en face de cette fortune dont elle était incapable, avait plié la tête.
FRENCH   M.
ENGLISH   \"They fall to pieces as soon as you handle them.\"  The two women had become quite intimate since Monsieur de Boves had been confined to his arm-chair by an attack of gout.
ENGLISH   Great fat fellows were reading and lolling about without even thinking of giving up their seats to the ladies.
ENGLISH   Did they wish to wound the feelings of all the mothers and young married women amongst their customers? And so it was decided, with great solemnity, that every married saleswoman should, whenever necessary, be sent to a special midwife\'s at the Paradise\'s expense.
ENGLISH   It\'s settled if your Monday\'s sale proves as important as you expect.\"  They shook hands, and Mouret, delighted, took his leave, for he never enjoyed his dinner unless before sitting down at table he had been to glance at the day\'s receipts at The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   Les queues diminuaient maintenant, six voitures roulaient de front, d\'un bord à l\'autre, au milieu des battements de portières, des claquements de fouet, du bourdonnement des piétons, qui débordaient parmi les roues.
FRENCH    -- Ah! pourquoi, pourquoi...
FRENCH   Tous se levèrent en sursaut, rompant le triste silence.
FRENCH   Elle avait fini par en rire, c\'étaient comme des rendez-vous acceptés.
FRENCH   Si ton intérêt est d\'entrer là-dedans, je serai le premier à te dire: Entres-y.
FRENCH   Mais elle se remit tout de suite, raconta qu\'elle était montée s\'asseoir un peu, pour échapper à l\'écrasement de la foule.
ENGLISH    \"You\'ll stay with us, I\'ll stake my life.
FRENCH   Nous sommes tous désolés de votre départ.
FRENCH   Et les Bédoré, et les Vanpouille, ça ne tient plus debout, c\'est comme moi, les jambes cassées.
FRENCH   Je suis Denise, et voici Jean, et voici Pépé...
ENGLISH   \"Ah! why, why? The looms must be kept going, I tell you.
FRENCH   Sous les galeries couvertes, il faisait très chaud, une chaleur de serre, moite et enfermée, chargée de l\'odeur fade des tissus, et dans laquelle s\'étouffait le piétinement de la foule.
FRENCH    Puis, en familier de la maison, il se permit d\'ajouter:  -- Il y a une bien charmante jeune fille, dans l\'antichambre...
FRENCH   Quand j\'ai appris la mort de ton père, parbleu! je t\'ai dit ce qu\'on dit d\'habitude.
FRENCH   Nous n\'arriverons jamais.
FRENCH   Il aurait fallu le nourrir de bouillon, et elle n\'avait même pas de pain.
FRENCH   Ne fais pas semblant de me connaître, si tu veux.
ENGLISH   Albert sought to make him say that the mistake had been made by the customer herself, but all Joseph could do was to stutter and twist the shaggy beard that ornamented his scarred face, struggling the while between his conscience and his gratitude to his protectors.
ENGLISH   Next his father had passed by, half choking, his face red and showing signs of apoplexy.
ENGLISH    Baudu had spoken correctly.
FRENCH    Mais celle-ci passa sans l\'écouter, toute à une vente qu\'elle bâclait.
ENGLISH   The rail, said he, was close against the wall, there was a hole at the corner, sometimes the lodgers left their dust-boxes there.
ENGLISH    \"Denise,\" said he simply, \"come to-morrow and have dinner with us, and bring the little one.
ENGLISH   All at once he noticed that he was blocking up the doorway.
FRENCH   On ne sait plus où l\'on est.
FRENCH   Mais elle était sans colère, elle ne les avait trouvées belles ni l\'une ni l\'autre, pas plus la grande avec son chignon de cheveux roux tombant sur son cou de cheval, que la petite, avec son teint de lait tourné, qui amollissait sa face plate et comme sans os.
ENGLISH   No, no, he felt no remorse, he was simply doing the work of his age, and she knew it, she who loved life, who had a passion for vast transactions settled in the full glare of publicity.
FRENCH   Et, lorsqu\'elle rentra et qu\'elle eut fermé derrière elle la petite porte ronde, elle retrouva Mme Robineau serrant toujours son mari entre ses bras éperdus, sous le demi-jour louche qui venait des deux étoiles découpées dans la tôle.
FRENCH   Pauline elle-même éclatait, tellement l\'accoucheuse lui semblait drôle.
ENGLISH   At all events they were all of opinion that this little saleswoman had played her game with the science of a expert woman of the world and was now venturing on the supreme stroke by offering him this bargain: Marry me, or I go.
ENGLISH   Then, hardly out of the train, she made straight for The Ladies\' Paradise, and spent all her savings.
FRENCH   Elle s\'en était ouverte à Robineau, qui lui restait sympathique, depuis leur première rencontre chez Vinçard; et il lui avait procuré des noeuds de cravate, à cinq sous la douzaine.
FRENCH    Au second, la course recommença.
FRENCH   On va vous fouiller, puisqu\'il le faut.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! comment ça?  -- Oui, c\'est ce grand serin de Deloche qui nous a fait la confidence...
ENGLISH   What was the use of struggling? what was the use of trying to impose herself on them when none of them liked her? And she went away without a word, not even casting another look at the room where she had so long battled.
ENGLISH    He was rather pale, but his eyes were clear and resolute.
ENGLISH   The idea that he was killing her, and taking Pépé\'s share as well, affected him so much that he began to cry.
ENGLISH   The other may even be a little thicker.\"  And the discussion ended by becoming quite bitter.
FRENCH   C\'était Colomban.
FRENCH    -- Nom de dieu! nom de dieu!...
FRENCH    Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
ENGLISH   He accused her of socialism, embarrassed her by pointing out the difficulties of carrying out these schemes; for she spoke in the simplicity of her soul, bravely trusting in the future, whenever she perceived a dangerous gap underlying her tender-hearted plans.
FRENCH    -- Tonnerre de Dieu! lui cria Bourras, du plus loin qu\'il l\'aperçut, le coup est fait...
ENGLISH    It was no easy matter to reach the staircase.
ENGLISH   And, finally, ever since the autumn, she had been keeping company with a salesman at the Bon Marché, a very nice tall fellow.
ENGLISH   This bareness was the visible proof of the complete, exact taking of the stock.
ENGLISH   \"I\'m off, and just you dry your eyes.
FRENCH   Malgré son serment d\'être forte, elle était arrivée toute froide dans le cabinet, avec la certitude qu\'on l\'appelait pour lui signifier son renvoi.
ENGLISH    At half-past nine a bell rang for the first luncheon.
FRENCH   Bourras, justement, ne décolérait plus, en plein dans le vacarme du chantier voisin.
ENGLISH   Rows of cases were coming down of themselves, falling like rain from some upper stream.
FRENCH   Vous savez, Mlle de Fontenailles.
FRENCH   À la fin, c\'est dégoûtant, ma parole d\'honneur!.
FRENCH   Elle y rêvait son avenir, beaucoup de travail pour élever les enfants, avec d\'autres choses encore, elle ne savait quoi, des choses lointaines dont le désir et la crainte la faisaient trembler.
ENGLISH   But as Denise was about to deliver to another young lady the silk which Madame Desforges had purchased the latter seemed to change her mind, and declared that she would decidedly take one of the travelling cloaks, the light grey one with the hood; and Denise then had to wait complacently till she was ready to return to the mantle department.
ENGLISH   \"I fancy that Caroline, who was rather romantic also, must have been carried away by the gentleman\'s extravagant plans.
FRENCH    Et, la voiture s\'étant arrêtée à la route du cimetière, il descendit avec la jeune fille.
ENGLISH   His former affections, his love for Henriette herself--so delicate, so handsome, so flattering to his pride--had never been more than agreeable pastimes; whereas nowadays his heart beat with anguish, his life was taken, he could no longer even enjoy the forgetfulness of sleep.
ENGLISH   At last Baugé paid, and the two girls went out.
ENGLISH   The director\'s new office was fitted up more luxuriously than the old one; the rep hangings had been replaced by velvet ones, and a book-case, inlaid with ivory, occupied one whole side; but on the walls there was still no other picture than the portrait of Madame Hédouin, a young woman with a calm handsome face, smiling in a gilded frame.
FRENCH    -- Il ne vous faut rien, aujourd\'hui, madame?  -- Non, merci, répondit Henriette.
FRENCH    Mais, comme il était défendu de remonter dans les chambres, et surtout de s\'y enfermer à deux, Denise l\'emmena au bout du couloir, où se trouvait le salon de réunion, une galanterie du directeur pour ces demoiselles, qui pouvaient y causer ou y travailler, en attendant onze heures.
FRENCH   Robineau est de retour, mademoiselle, dit le premier, avec une politesse moqueuse.
ENGLISH   Had it not been for my rheumatics, I could soon have retired with ten thousand francs a year.
ENGLISH   Just fancy, as I was coming, along I went into The Paradise, and as I have again been very extravagant, I did not like to leave it in my cab for fear of being robbed.\" Then, having perceived Mouret, she resumed laughing: \"Ah! sir, I didn\'t mean to give you an advertisement, for I didn\'t know you were here.
FRENCH    Bourdoncle le suivit.
ENGLISH   \"Well,\" said he, \"come in, now you\'re here.
FRENCH   Et lui qui, depuis six mois, la traitait en enfant, qui la conseillait parfois, cédant à des idées d\'expérience, à des envies méchantes de savoir comment une femme poussait et se perdait dans Paris, il ne riait plus, il éprouvait un sentiment indéfinissable de surprise et de crainte, mêlé de tendresse.
ENGLISH   But it had turned very chilly and they were obliged to dine in one of the closed rooms, where the table-cloths were still damp from the humidity of winter.
ENGLISH    Jean began again: \"The husband, who has a big knife----\"  \"Get along!\" repeated Denise, still pushing him forward.
ENGLISH   And, indeed during the following week, Mouret boldly reduced the price of The Paris Delight by four sous, after a lively discussion with Bourdoncle and the other managers, in which he had succeeded in convincing them that they must accept the challenge, even at a sacrifice; for these four sous represented a dead loss, the silk being already sold at strict cost price.
ENGLISH    \"Very good!\" said Mouret, aloud, coming nearer.
FRENCH   Tout un public silencieux entourait la table, encombrée de revues et de journaux, garnie de papeteries et d\'encriers.
ENGLISH   It must be another quality that she was referring to.
ENGLISH   Yes, the wife of a judge! However, we always try to settle these matters.\"  He paused to point out Jouve, who was just then looking sharply after a woman at the ribbon counter below.
FRENCH    Elle avait repris l\'éventail, l\'examinait de nouveau avec sa fille Blanche; et, sur sa grande face régulière, dans ses larges yeux dormants, montait l\'envie contenue et désespérée du caprice qu\'elle ne pourrait contenter.
FRENCH   Maintenant que ce dernier lui laissait vider ses tiroirs, elle volait avec de l\'argent plein sa poche, elle volait pour voler, comme on aime pour aimer, sous le coup de fouet du désir, dans le détraquement de la névrose que ses appétits de luxe inassouvis avaient développée en elle, autrefois, à travers l\'énorme et brutale tentation des grands magasins.
FRENCH   La certitude de l\'avoir l\'empêchait de la désirer.
FRENCH   Je finirai par flanquer les trembleurs à la porte.
FRENCH   Le magasin, vide encore de clientes, et où le personnel arrivait à peine, bourdonnait à l\'intérieur comme une ruche qui s\'éveille.
FRENCH   Du reste, les pertes énormes se trouvaient couvertes, et le public commençait à hausser les épaules, en disant que la réclame était superbe.
ENGLISH    Madame Marty endeavouring to find a phrase to express her rapture, exclaimed: \"It\'s like fairyland!\" And then trying to find out where she was she continued: \"Let\'s see, the braid is in the mercery department.
FRENCH   Notre mariage a beau être annoncé, ils ne comprennent pas qu\'on s\'embrasse, ces animaux-là!  Denise, toute remuée, affecta de ne pas les avoir vus.
FRENCH   Au comptoir de Denise, s\'étouffait une cohue de mères, traînant des bandes de fillettes et de petits garçons, noyées sous les vêtements qu\'on leur essayait.
ENGLISH   At first Mouret and his companion turned into the Rue-Saint-Augustin gallery occupied by the linen department, from one end to the other.
FRENCH   Il n\'a pas l\'air à la noce.
FRENCH   Vous avez encore peur qu\'on ne vous prenne de force?  Et Pauline riait d\'un bon rire.
ENGLISH   She was sorry now that she had run away.
ENGLISH    \"How much, Lhomme?\" asked Mouret.
ENGLISH   Isn\'t it shameful? A marchioness! And he makes her follow like a dog the creatures he has picked up in the street!\" Then she tried to calm herself, adding, with an affected air of indifference: \"Let\'s go and see their display of silks.\"  The silk department was like a great chamber of love, hung with white by the caprice of some snowy maiden wishing to show off her own spotless whiteness.
FRENCH    -- Nous préférons nous en aller tous, si on le garde, déclarait Hutin.
ENGLISH   Robineau, utterly beaten, out of breath, also stopped at five francs, not having the courage to go any lower.
FRENCH   Après un court silence, il reprit:  -- Vous vous êtes décidé, n\'est-ce pas? Mon Dieu! je vous approuve.
ENGLISH   After these, others would be swept off in their turn and there was no reason why every business should not be driven away.
ENGLISH    Trophies and flags had been added in honour of the inauguration; each storey was gay with banners and standards bearing the arms of the principal towns of France; and right at the top, the flags of foreign nations, run up on masts, fluttered in the breeze.
ENGLISH   There was nothing but white goods, all the white articles from each department, a riot of white, a white constellation whose fixed radiance was at first blinding, so that details could not be distinguished.
ENGLISH   It was a complete invasion of the newspapers, the walls, and the ears of the public, as if some monstrous brass trumpet were being blown incessantly, carrying the tumult of the great sales to the four corners of the earth.
FRENCH   Vous ne l\'aurez pas, quand même vous envahiriez la rue entière!  Denise, maintenant, avait du pain tous les jours.
ENGLISH   But she is standing over there, near that counter, with Mademoiselle Blanche.\"  The count could not help starting back, and casting a side glance at Madame Guibal.
ENGLISH   On the other side of his table stood Denise, upright, serious, and pale.
ENGLISH   Cloths and Flannels.
FRENCH   Elle est souffrante, oh! rien de dangereux.
FRENCH    -- Forte, forte, répéta Henriette qui blêmissait à son tour.
ENGLISH   The youngsters were loaded with parcels: Madeleine had a dress for herself under her arm, Edmond was carrying a collection of little shoes, whilst the youngest, Lucien, was wearing a new cap.
ENGLISH    At nine o\'clock Denise came over to stay with her aunt.
ENGLISH   A final glow still shone on one side of the silver teapot, a gleam like that of a night-light, burning in an alcove balmy with the perfume of tea.
ENGLISH   When he arrived at his office, he opened the door wide, saying, \"Walk in, mademoiselle.\"  And, closing the door, he went to his table.
FRENCH   Et il répondait à Mme Boutarel, en train d\'achever son après-midi au Bonheur des Dames, où elle était déjà restée trois heures le matin, lorsque l\'avertissement de Favier lui causa un sursaut.
FRENCH    Quand on arriva au boulevard de Clichy, la voiture roula plus vite, on entendit l\'essoufflement du monde, la hâte inconsciente du cortège, pressé d\'en finir.
ENGLISH   He could not bring a customer to the department without making her feel quite confused.
ENGLISH    \"No, no,\" said she, \"let me be; I\'m always thirsty.
ENGLISH   Her heart swelled with gratitude, and she gave him her friendship in the few disjointed words which her emotion allowed her to utter.
ENGLISH   \"Ninety francs, is it not?\" And, seeing Madame Marty and her daughter busy with a lot of trashy porcelains, she resumed, as she carried off Madame Guibal, \"You will find us in the reading-room, I really must sit down a little while.\"  In the reading-room, however, they were obliged to remain standing.
ENGLISH   She had no doubt this was Madame Aurélie; but, frightened by her sharp voice, she remained standing, still waiting.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien? qu\'est-ce que cela fait? reprit-il.
ENGLISH   I never saw anything richer.\"  \"Ah, that\'s a good idea,\" resumed Madame Desforges, \"I\'ve got several yards of Alençon somewhere; I must look them up for a trimming.\"  Then the voices fell again, sinking into a murmur.
ENGLISH   Down below, in order not to outshine the goods, the decoration was sober, with large regular spaces in neutral tints; then as the metallic work ascended, the capitals of the columns became richer, the rivets formed ornaments, the shoulder-pieces and corbels were covered with sculptured work; and at last, up above, glistened painting, green and red, amidst a prodigality of gold, floods of gold, heaps of gold, even to the glazed-work, whose panes were enamelled and inlaid with gold.
FRENCH   Tout ce que vous me demanderiez, tout ce que vous exigeriez de moi...
ENGLISH   In the first place, the ground-floor was composed of black gloves; and then in turn came straw-coloured, mignonette, and tan-coloured gloves, distributed over the decoration, bordering the windows, outlining the balconies, and taking the place of the tiles.
FRENCH   Vous allez vous faire du mal, et nous avions le monde nécessaire.
FRENCH   Pauline n\'ignorait rien.
ENGLISH   He ought to have laughed at such an idea; yet this attitude of tender pride completely conquered his heart.
ENGLISH   \"Give me the fifteen francs, and this shall be the last time, I swear it to you.
ENGLISH   This dress was still too large, too wide across the shoulders; but she was so flurried by her emotion that she paid no heed to petty questions of coquetry.
ENGLISH   He assured him that he need not interfere, and without appearing at all excited about this robbery, as if he had foreseen it long ago, he explained in what way it would all be arranged.
ENGLISH   \"Besides, I might have died; you would have known nothing about it.\"  She was examining him also, and thought that he looked tired and nervous, his eyes heavy, his complexion livid.
FRENCH    Alors, Mouret la suivit.
ENGLISH   Was it not enough to have to defend herself against him? Must she even fight against herself, against the gust of tenderness which sometimes took away all her courage? When he spoke to her like this, when she saw him such a prey to emotion, so overcome, she hardly knew why she still refused; and it was only afterwards that, in the depths of her healthy, girlish nature, she found the pride and prudence which maintained her intact in her virtuous resolutions.
FRENCH   Puis, d\'une voix affaiblie de convalescente:  -- Je voudrais bien un verre d\'eau...
ENGLISH   Whom could she have lost--her husband or her father? Not her father, for she would have appeared more melancholy.
FRENCH   Depuis un instant, il la regardait faire son ménage de petite mère, entre les deux gaillards, les grondant et les embrassant, les retournant comme des bébés qu\'on change de linge.
FRENCH   Si je ne me dépêche pas de prendre mon lacet et de me sauver, je suis perdue.
ENGLISH   Pépé, however, at last climbed on his knees, and impatiently stretched out his hands towards the dog\'s head.
FRENCH    -- Bonsoir, mademoiselle.
ENGLISH   Good night, mademoiselle.\"  \"Good night, sir.\"  When Mouret had quitted her, Denise went back under the chestnut-trees, into the black gloom.
FRENCH   Et vous ne savez pas combien il l\'a vendue, ma maison? cent cinquante mille francs, quatre fois ce qu\'elle vaut! Encore un joli voleur, celui- là!...
FRENCH    -- Venez avec moi, nous collationnerons...
FRENCH   Aussi ce dernier souffrait-il des trois francs emportés d\'une façon si aisée, par un vendeur qu\'il ne reconnaissait pas de sa force.
FRENCH   Son sourire perdait sa pointe ironique, il regardait le jeune homme, gagné peu à peu par sa foi, prit pour lui d\'un commencement de tendresse.
ENGLISH   Quite a battle was waged at the shop-counters, where woman was pitted against woman in a sharp rivalry of wealth and beauty.
ENGLISH   Favier\'s secret undermining could be heard, like a muffled sound of jaw-bones at work underground.
FRENCH    -- Quoi donc? murmura-t-il, qu\'est-il arrivé?  D\'un mot, Denise le renseigna.
FRENCH    -- Poulet, répéta Favier, pris d\'impatience.
ENGLISH    \"Madame Aurélie, please.\"  \"I am Madame Aurélie.\"  Denise\'s mouth was dry and parched, her hands were cold; she felt some such fear as when she was a child and trembled at the thought of being whipped.
ENGLISH   The child, affectionate as a kitten, hid his little head without saying a word.
FRENCH    Ils étaient de nouveau l\'un devant l\'autre; et, ne sachant de quelle façon se quitter, ils se mirent à rougir.
ENGLISH    \"What--what, you here?\" he several times repeated.
FRENCH   Enfin, ils descendirent à Joinville, passèrent dans l\'île toute de suite, pour commander le déjeuner; et ils restèrent là, le long des berges, sous de hauts peupliers qui bordaient la Marne.
ENGLISH   Whilst this was going on, Madame Aurélie herself, assisted by three other saleswomen, was counting out the silk garments, which Denise entered on the sheets of paper given to her.
ENGLISH   \"I was flat enough to ask for skate.
FRENCH   Amusez-vous, mon cher.
FRENCH    On entendit le coup sourd de la pièce, tandis qu\'il ajoutait plus bas:  -- Vous savez qu\'elle a fait la vie chez ce vieux toqué de Bourras.
ENGLISH   Really, one could slap them at times.\"  And then the ladies vented their spite.
FRENCH   Leur surprise fut grande de le trouver presque vide.
FRENCH   Votre façade n\'est qu\'un ornement, les nouvelles constructions n\'agrandiraient que d\'un dixième la superficie de vos magasins, et c\'est jeter de bien grosses sommes dans une simple réclame.
FRENCH   Peut-être se serait-elle donnée à un autre, mais jamais elle n\'avait aimé que cet homme dont un regard la terrifiait.
FRENCH   On dit que vous êtes deux mille sept cents employés et que le chiffre d\'affaires atteindra cent millions cette année...
FRENCH   Les ombres noires s\'enlevaient avec vigueur sur les fonds pâles.
FRENCH    If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
FRENCH   Voici des gants de Suède à un franc soixante- quinze, première qualité...
ENGLISH   She never wept before the children.
FRENCH   Elle saisit la main de Denise, qui s\'était penchée vers elle, toute retournée par cette scène.
FRENCH   Le malheur est que son service l\'appelle aux quatre coins de la France, dans les dépôts d\'étalons, et qu\'il a de la sorte de continuels prétextes pour disparaître.
FRENCH   À quoi bon? ça ne tournait jamais bien.
FRENCH   Oh! il m\'aime bien quand même.
FRENCH   Merci.
ENGLISH   Every fresh bit of lace to him meant disaster; bitter days of teaching, long journeys to pupils through the mud, the whole constant effort of his life resulting in secret misery, the hell of a necessitous household.
ENGLISH   And yet, he had only really begun to feel this love on the evening of their walk under the chestnut trees of the Tuileries.
ENGLISH   Baugé had just called for the bill, seeing that Denise was no better; indeed she was now quite white, choking from the tears she withheld; however, the waiter did not appear, and she had to submit to more of Hutin\'s loud talk.
ENGLISH    \"I\'ve just arrived from Valognes, madame.\"  This was a fresh disaster.
FRENCH   Hutin minait sourdement le second, dont il voulait la place.
FRENCH   Un doute restait au fond du charme qui opérait peu à peu sur lui.
FRENCH   Ah bien! je n\'ai jamais vu ça.
FRENCH    Un sourire pinçait finement les lèvres du vieillard.
FRENCH   Elle finit par rire, et elle l\'embrassa une seconde fois, en disant:  -- Mais, ma chérie, quand on se rencontre et qu\'on se plaît! Êtes- vous drôle! On ne vous forcera pas...
FRENCH   Dans les moments de presse, on ne tenait plus compte du tableau de ligne, les vendeurs servaient au hasard des clientes.
ENGLISH   Come, let\'s take a turn round the place.
FRENCH    -- Madame Aurélie? répéta Denise.
FRENCH    Denise tremblait, quand il lui criait furieusement:  -- L\'art est fichu, entendez-vous!...
ENGLISH   Ah! so he was spiteful, he attacked her as well as the others! And she felt a sort of supreme anguish, the breaking of a last tie.
FRENCH    Denise l\'écoutait; et, si elle avait encore ignoré son amour, elle n\'en aurait plus douté à la souffrance dont le nom de Clara et l\'allusion à Mme Desforges lui tordirent le coeur.
FRENCH   Puis, elle sortit après le déjeuner, avec l\'espoir de soulager au moins ceux-là.
FRENCH   Il redevint affectueux.
FRENCH   Sa souveraineté lui causait parfois une surprise inquiète: qu\'avaient-ils donc tous à lui obéir? elle n\'était point jolie, elle ne faisait pas le mal.
FRENCH   On avait retourné la disposition intérieure: maintenant, les soldes étaient sur la rue du Dix-Décembre, la soie se trouvait au milieu, la ganterie occupait, au fond, le hall Saint-Augustin; et du nouveau vestibule d\'honneur, lorsqu\'on levait les yeux, on apercevait toujours la literie, déménagée d\'une extrémité à l\'autre du second étage.
FRENCH   C\'était un développement qui lui semblait sans fin, dans la fuite de la perspective, avec les étalages du rez-de-chaussée et les glaces sans tain de l\'entresol, derrière lesquelles on voyait toute la vie intérieure des comptoirs.
ENGLISH   Yes, I had determined to understand the situation and be very good.\" Then his tears again began to flow and he tried to steady his voice.
FRENCH   Dites, vous ne pouvez pas la laisser mourir ainsi!  Il parla enfin, tout à fait bouleversé.
ENGLISH   In the neighbouring shops, however, all was fermentation; and against the windows one could see the pale faces of the petty tradesmen, counting the first carriages which stopped before the new grand entrance in the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin.
FRENCH    Ils durent se taire, des personnes déjà tournaient la tête.
ENGLISH    \"What!\" asked Madame Marty, \"have you deserted Sauveur, then?\"  \"No, my dear, but I wished to make an experiment.
FRENCH   D\'abord, elle le crut amoureux de Marguerite, à voir ses airs transis d\'amant qui désespère, car Marguerite, sage et couchant au magasin, n\'était point commode.
ENGLISH   Perhaps, at the bottom of this freak, there was also the calculating craft of a man delighted at escaping from a disastrous marriage.
FRENCH   N\'ayez donc pas peur, aveuglez-le...
FRENCH   Les plus minces tenaient de la place, devenaient arrogantes.
FRENCH   Lui aussi vit la tache blanche de la lettre; il regarda la jeune fille, tous deux rougirent de cette intrigue nouée devant eux.
ENGLISH   The two other ladies soon disappeared in the compact crowd on the ground-floor.
FRENCH    -- Soie de fantaisie, petits carreaux, trente-deux mètres, à six francs cinquante! cria ce dernier.
FRENCH   Adossé contre le mur, Deloche, bourré de pain, digérait en silence, les yeux levés sur le soupirail; et sa récréation, tous les jours, après le déjeuner, était de regarder ainsi les pieds des passants qui filaient vite au ras du trottoir, des pieds coupés aux chevilles, gros souliers, bottes élégantes, fines bottines de femme, un va-et-vient continu de pieds vivants, sans corps et sans tête.
ENGLISH   Mouret was actually thinking of sending these vehicles further still, even into the neighbouring departments; he would have liked to hear them rolling along every road in France, from one frontier to the other.
FRENCH    Ensuite, il se rendait à l\'autre bout des sous-sols, pour donner son coup d\'oeil habituel au service du départ.
FRENCH    -- Croyez-vous que Mme Aurélie reviendra bientôt?  Alors, la seconde du rayon, une femme maigre et laide qu\'elle n\'avait pas vue, une veuve à la mâchoire saillante et aux cheveux durs, lui cria d\'une armoire où elle vérifiait des étiquettes:  -- Attendez, si c\'est à Mme Aurélie en personne que vous désirez parler.
FRENCH   C\'est très mal.
ENGLISH    When Denise awoke from this dreamy contemplation of space and the summits of The Ladies\' Paradise, where her thoughts floated as in a vast solitude, she found that Deloche had caught hold of her hand.
FRENCH   Son bras amputé ne le gênait nullement dans cette besogne, et l\'on allait même par curiosité le voir vérifier la recette, tellement les billets et les pièces glissaient rapidement dans sa main gauche, la seule qui lui restât.
FRENCH   Je connais des femmes qui n\'achèteraient pas un ruban ailleurs qu\'au Louvre.
FRENCH   La maison s\'était agrandie démesurément, il avait créé ce rayon, cet autre encore, il gouvernait ce nouveau domaine, il étendait son empire jusqu\'à cette industrie, la dernière conquise; et c\'était non, toujours non, quand même.
FRENCH   Lorsque leur père était mort, emporté par la même fièvre qui avait pris leur mère, un mois auparavant, l\'oncle Baudu, dans l\'émotion de ce double deuil, avait bien écrit à sa nièce qu\'il y aurait toujours chez lui une place pour elle, le jour où elle voudrait tenter la fortune à Paris; mais cette lettre remontait déjà à près d\'une année, et la jeune fille se repentait maintenant d\'avoir ainsi quitté Valognes, en un coup de tête, sans avertir son oncle.
FRENCH   Les idées commerciales les plus larges naissaient de la pratique, sous ce front étroit, dont les lignes pures annonçaient la volonté et l\'amour de l\'ordre.
FRENCH    They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.
FRENCH    D\'ailleurs, ces dames n\'avaient pas lâché les dentelles.
ENGLISH   The demonstration was developing into quite a riot; and when, after the funeral service, the procession started off again, all continued to follow, although it was a long walk from the Rue Saint-Honoré to the Montmartre Cemetery.
ENGLISH   \"Paul is to join us at about four o\'clock in the reading-room, on leaving the ministry.\"  They had been married about a month, and Vallagnosc, after a three weeks\' leave of absence spent in the South of France, had just returned to his post.
ENGLISH   What! it was wicked? And he could not understand; from infancy he had always treated his sister like a comrade, and thought it quite a natural thing to open his heart to her.
ENGLISH   As a rule, the first glance told him if a customer meant to buy, and how much.
FRENCH    -- Je ne devrais pas être bon, dit-il.
FRENCH   Henriette versait, Mme Marty tenait la tasse, pendant que Mme de Boves et Mme Bourdelais se disputaient l\'honneur de le sucrer.
ENGLISH    Liénard\'s last remark to Deloche referred to a scene which had occurred on the previous evening, at the Café Saint-Roch.
FRENCH   Oui, c\'est propre, c\'est très propre...
ENGLISH   Why did he wound her with the offer of all that money, when she was overflowing with gratitude? He was stepping nearer to her still, continuing to joke, when, to his great annoyance, Bourdoncle came in under the pretence of informing him of the enormous number of entries--no fewer than seventy thousand customers had entered The Ladies\' Paradise that day.
FRENCH    -- Alors, à quand le mariage? demanda Mme Baudu.
FRENCH   Une fraîcheur tombait, des enfants riaient au loin., en poussant des cerceaux.
ENGLISH   People talked of considerable enlargements, of gigantic shops with frontages on the Rue de la Michodière, the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, and the Rue Monsigny.
ENGLISH    Thereupon they both blushed deeply, and still all timidity remained for a moment face to face, affected by the striking similarity of their positions yet not daring to openly express a desire for each other\'s success.
FRENCH   L\'avis d\'une femme, si humble qu\'elle soit, est toujours utile à écouter, quand elle a un peu d\'intelligence...
FRENCH   Il ordonna à sa femme de l\'attendre, il saisit le bras de son vieux camarade, qu\'il mit au courant, en paroles entrecoupées.
FRENCH    -- À propos, et chez Vinçard? demanda Mme Baudu.
FRENCH    Il demeura étonné.
ENGLISH   \"I saw him this morning, and he faithfully promised me.
FRENCH   Bouthemont, que préoccupait l\'aventure, réfléchissait.
ENGLISH   Albert had disappeared into the inspector\'s office.
ENGLISH   Marguerite related how exasperated Bourdoncle was; whilst Madame Aurélie, greatly vexed, declared that Madame Frédéric ought at least to have informed her, for such hypocrisy had never before been heard of.
ENGLISH   Gaujean had come to dinner and, after the roast leg of mutton, had broached the subject in his Lyonese voice, thickened by the Rhône fogs.
ENGLISH   It was Denise, who, after waiting for nearly an hour in the street, a prey to a violent attack of timidity, had at last decided to enter.
ENGLISH   The Baudus were having their meal; she could hear the clatter of the knives and forks in the little dining-room.
ENGLISH   It was the cathedral of modern commerce, light but strong, the very thing for a nation of customers.
FRENCH   Et prenez garde, vous me piquez maintenant!  À deux reprises encore, Mouret tâcha vainement d\'intervenir, pour faire cesser cette scène.
FRENCH   On vous a accusée trop légèrement d\'une faute...
ENGLISH    \"You! you!\" he stammered.
ENGLISH    \"We are in the Rue de la Michodière,\" replied Jean.
ENGLISH    \"I don\'t know,\" he replied.
ENGLISH   \"But it was a miserable spring, always raining! People bought nothing but black silks.\"  His fat, jovial face became cloudy as he gazed at the growing heap on the floor, whilst Hutin called out louder still, in a sonorous voice tinged with an accent of triumph--\"Fancy silks, small check, twenty-eight yards, at six francs and a half.\"  There was still another shelf-full.
ENGLISH   She insulted him, she stammered that it was cowardly for a man to torture a woman in that way.
FRENCH   À toute heure, elle le trouvait de l\'autre côté de la rue, sur le seuil du Vieil Elbeuf, les yeux levés et ne quittant pas du regard ces demoiselles des confections.
FRENCH   Jean, pris d\'intérêt pendant la conversation sur le mariage, dévisageait la cousine Geneviève, qu\'il trouvait trop molle, trop pâle, et qu\'il comparait au fond de lui à un petit lapin blanc, avec des oreilles noires et des yeux rouges.
FRENCH   Oh! il ne faut pas l\'attendre, son patron l\'aura retenu.
FRENCH   Il reprit:  -- Enfin, tu es pour eux.
FRENCH   Comme tous les jeunes messieurs des nouveautés, il avait une rage de dépense, se battant la semaine entière à son rayon, avec une âpreté d\'avare, dans le seul désir de jeter le dimanche son argent à la volée, sur les champs de courses, au travers des restaurants et des bals; jamais une économie, pas une avance, le gain aussitôt dévoré que touché, l\'insouciance absolue du lendemain.
ENGLISH   She wished to go and see him to explain the matter to him, simply in order to let him know the truth; for she was quite ready to go away as soon as he should know it.
ENGLISH   On the previous day, despite his jocularity, he had experienced a feeling of wounded pride, on seeing the elegance of one of his saleswomen questioned in Madame Desforges\'s presence.
FRENCH   Pépé, toujours pendu à sa main, allongeait ses courtes jambes pour la suivre.
ENGLISH   And, beneath the inquisitive chatter with which they overwhelmed the young man, one could divine their different temperaments as purchasers.
ENGLISH   Denise, who had heard everything, followed her with a glance of gratitude, while Madame Aurélie gave her a book of debit-notes with her name on it, remarking:  \"To-morrow you must get yourself up better; and now, try and pick up the ways of the house, and wait your turn for selling.
ENGLISH   And as for her husband, he does not care a straw for fifteen francs.
ENGLISH   The latter did not know them, never having set foot in the little town since the day when he had left it as a boy, to enter the service of the draper Hauchecorne, whose daughter he had subsequently married.
FRENCH   C\'était même ce système qui, haussant ses prix de revient, ne lui permettait pas de lutter contre Dumonteil, pour la fourniture du Paris-Bonheur.
ENGLISH   He had suddenly remembered that \"unkempt girl,\" as Bourdoncle called her; and he, who usually detested the part of fault-finder, had thought of sending for her and stirring her up a bit, if she were still dressed in the style of a country wench.
ENGLISH   He spent hours in this solitude, often without being disturbed during the whole day, and bewildered and unable to find the goods when a stray customer chanced to venture in.
FRENCH   Quand on a des tissages un peu partout, aux environs de Lyon, dans le Gard, dans l\'Isère, on ne peut chômer un jour, sans des pertes énormes...
ENGLISH    But this trouble, the only one she had outside, did not in any way change Denise\'s equable temper.
FRENCH    Mais Hutin se précipita, c\'était son tour, et il avait reconnu «la jolie dame», cette blonde adorable que le rayon désignait ainsi, ne sachant rien d\'elle, pas même son nom.
FRENCH    Hutin dut reprendre les articles de Mme Marty et marcher devant ces dames, pour les mener aux confections.
FRENCH   Cette bonne Henriette goûtait un plaisir de veuve à marier les gens; si bien que, lorsqu\'elle avait pourvu les filles, il lui arrivait de laisser les pères, choisir des amies dans sa société; mais cela naturellement, en toute bonne grâce, sans que le monde y trouvât jamais matière à scandale.
FRENCH   Il était propre et clair, d\'un luxe tout moderne, petit pourtant, et pauvre de marchandises.
ENGLISH   But she soon left them again to reply to a salesman, who was looking for her.
FRENCH    -- Allons, dépêchons! criait Mouret, avec la tranquille assurance de son génie.
FRENCH    Mais elle eut la voix coupée.
FRENCH    -- Je ne causais pas.
FRENCH   Et il regardait l\'entaille ouverte, le creux libre enfin dans le flanc du Bonheur des Dames, débarrassé de la verrue qui le déshonorait.
FRENCH   Pendant dix minutes, les trottoirs en étaient encombrés; et les boutiquiers, devant leurs portes, songeaient à l\'unique commis, qu\'ils ne savaient déjà comment nourrir.
FRENCH   Les journaux débordaient de détails: le feu mis par une explosion de gaz pendant la nuit, la fuite épouvantée des vendeuses en chemise, l\'héroïsme de Bouthemont qui en avait sauvé cinq sur ses épaules.
FRENCH   Vous jugerez s\'il vaut deux mille francs.
FRENCH   Quand Mme Baudu et Geneviève revinrent, elles le trouvèrent bien sage, et Denise assura qu\'il ne faisait jamais plus de bruit: il restait muet les journées entières, vivant de caresses.
FRENCH   C\'était par un instinct du bonheur qu\'elle s\'entêtait, pour satisfaire son besoin d\'une vie tranquille, et non pour obéir à l\'idée de la vertu.
FRENCH    Il le savait, on lui avait appris depuis peu qu\'elle était chez Robineau.
FRENCH    Blanche les avait rejoints, et elle marchait derrière eux.
ENGLISH   Try and cheer up.\"  But in a very low and heart-broken voice the girl replied: \"Why do you tell me a falsehood? Look! he can\'t help it, he\'s glancing up there again.
FRENCH   Elle-même alla tourner la manivelle, l\'engrenage avait un cri plaintif, les feuilles de tôle descendaient avec lenteur, ainsi qu\'une draperie lourde tombant sur le dénouement d\'un cinquième acte.
ENGLISH   Piles of ribbons half hid the heads of the customers, a wall of flannel threw out a promontory; on all sides mirrors multiplied the departments, reflecting the displays and the groups of people, now showing faces reversed, and now halves of shoulders and arms; whilst to the right and to the left the lateral galleries opened up other vistas, the snowy depths of the linen department and the speckled depths of the hosiery counters--distant views which were illumined by rays of light from some glazed bay, and in which the crowd seemed but so much human dust.
FRENCH    Denise, dès la porte, avait eu les yeux attirés par le portrait de Mme Hédouin; et, malgré son grand trouble, elle en demeurait préoccupée.
FRENCH    -- Il paraît, expliqua Baugé, après avoir écouté les conversations derrière lui, il paraît que les étudiants ont reconnu la femme de Hutin, une ancienne du quartier, qui chante à présent dans un beuglant, à Montmartre.
FRENCH   Je la tenais comme ça, et elle m\'embrassait...
ENGLISH   Madame Baudu carried Pépé off to show him some pictures.
ENGLISH    \"I know,\" he murmured, \"that old men are wanting in ardour.
ENGLISH   He took the fan, examined it, and was about to give his opinion, when the footman opened the door and announced:  \"Madame Marty.\"  There then entered a thin, ugly woman, disfigured by small-pox but dressed with elaborate elegance.
FRENCH   Oh! tu peux être tranquille.
FRENCH   Alors, Clara, tout en mangeant sa raie sans dégoût, avec une insouciance de fille nourrie autrefois de lard rance, causa d\'un drame affreux, dont le récit emplissait les journaux.
ENGLISH   \"I feel sure he\'s ruining himself with others because she repulses him.
FRENCH    -- Que désire madame? demanda Mignot en voyant Mme Marty plantée devant le chalet.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle shook his head.
ENGLISH   He always came to the conclusion that every effort was futile, every hour equally weary and empty, and the world incurably stupid and dull.
ENGLISH   Piot and Rivoire, whose shops slumbered in the gloom of the Passage Sainte-Anne.
ENGLISH   Oh! we must not wait for him; his master has kept him, I dare say.\" In reality she suspected some extraordinary adventure, and wished to apologize for him in advance.
FRENCH   Il était la séduction.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! it\'s only old Jouve!\" she murmured in a relieved tone.
FRENCH   Ces demoiselles parlaient de trahison, l\'accusaient d\'aller répéter à côté leurs moindres paroles.
ENGLISH   It was he who possessed them thus, who held them at his mercy by his continuous displays of novelties, his reductions of prices, and his \"returns,\" his gallantry, puffery, and advertisements.
FRENCH   Pas une des clientes entassées là, ne s\'était même aperçue de la scène.
ENGLISH   At last she decided to take a strong needle and sew on the soles, which were threatening to leave the uppers.
FRENCH   Tous en convenaient, le patron était le premier étalagiste de Paris, un étalagiste révolutionnaire à la vérité, qui avait fondé l\'école du brutal et du colossal dans la science de l\'étalage.
FRENCH   On eût dit que toutes les séductions des magasins aboutissaient à cette tentation suprême, que c\'était là l\'alcôve reculée de la chute, le coin de perdition où les plus fortes succombaient.
FRENCH   Je vous jure que j\'envoie chercher le commissaire, si vous ne me dites pas la vérité.
FRENCH   Et Mme Marty acheta le costume pour sa fille, en murmurant:  -- Bonne idée! Vous êtes pratique, vous, chère madame.
FRENCH   Quand les deux vendeuses eurent déjeuné, dans une petite salle voisine de la grande, et où les femmes étaient servies plus confortablement, Pauline dut aider Denise à descendre, car le pied de celle-ci se fatiguait.
FRENCH    -- Et votre viande, Hutin: Deloche la demande pour son dessert.
FRENCH   Ensuite, il voulait raisonner, il cherchait des moyens pratiques, pour l\'empêcher de franchir la porte; mais il butait sans cesse contre son impuissance, avec la rage de sa force et de son argent inutiles.
FRENCH   Les vendeurs ordinaires, chez moi, se font trois et quatre mille francs, plus que tu ne gagnes toi-même; et ils n\'ont pas coûté tes frais d\'instruction, ils n\'ont pas été lancés dans le monde, avec la promesse signée de le conquérir...
ENGLISH   It was very simple, every one came to that, it was said; for a woman alone in Paris could not live by her labour.
FRENCH   Une houle compacte de têtes roulait sous les galeries, s\'élargissant en fleuve débordé au milieu du hall.
ENGLISH   Her eyes filled with tears.
FRENCH    Le silence recommença.
FRENCH    -- Je le chasse! cria Mouret, qui mit toute sa souffrance dans ce cri furieux.
FRENCH   Et, maintenant, tâchez de prendre les habitudes de la maison, attendez votre tour de vente.
ENGLISH   His wife and daughter still kept their eyes on the floor, like submissive persons who would never think of interfering.
FRENCH   Chez moi, on me battait.
ENGLISH    \"Don\'t speak of them,\" said Henriette, by way of conclusion, \"they are a wretched lot as worthless as the goods they sell!\"  Mouret had the strength to smile.
FRENCH   Puis, elle se résigna, elle reprit son allure hautaine, marchant près de lui comme une reine qui daigne se confier aux bons soins d\'un aide de camp.
ENGLISH   This, then, was where she was going to live; and her first day--an abominable, endless day--filled her with sore distress.
FRENCH   Alors, elles revinrent devant la porte, où s\'établissait un courant de sortie, tout un défilé interminable de femmes et d\'enfants, sur qui flottait un nuage de ballons rouges.
FRENCH   Où est donc M.
FRENCH   Mignot surtout penchait sa jolie figure poupine, donnait de tendres inflexions à sa voix grasseyante de Parisien.
FRENCH    Une cloche sonnait au bout du couloir, il fallait laisser la place à la troisième table.
FRENCH    -- Il n\'est pas mal, et de coupe originale...
ENGLISH   And he gaily told her of all the gossip at the counters.
ENGLISH    She signed to him to cease speaking, herself quite unable to conceal her emotion, deeply affected by his suffering passion.
FRENCH   En haut, elles allaient s\'allumer aux étalages, lâcher le galop de l\'argent à travers les comptoirs, aussi vite emportées que montées, dans le furieux courant de vente qui traversait la maison.
FRENCH   Le quartier pensait qu\'il gagnerait, sans pourtant jurer de rien.
FRENCH   Sans doute, c\'était un amant qui l\'embellissait ainsi.
ENGLISH    \"You\'ve read about that man cutting his mistress\'s throat with a razor, haven\'t you?\"  \"Well!\" said a little, quiet, delicate-looking girl belonging to the under-linen department, \"she was unfaithful to him.
ENGLISH    \"Three thousand francs.\"  \"But that\'s pitiful pay! Ah! old man, I\'m really sorry for you.
FRENCH    D\'abord, en bas, dans les sous-sols, il s\'arrêtait devant la glissoire.
FRENCH   Dès les premiers jours, il vint un flot de clientes: Mme Marty, sous le prétexte de se montrer économe, acheta une robe dont elle n\'avait pas besoin; Mme Bourdelais trouva l\'étoffe belle, mais elle préféra attendre, flairant sans doute ce qui allait se passer.
FRENCH    Brusquement, il s\'interrompait.
FRENCH   La nécessité de la séparation la mettait en larmes; mais elle se répétait, avec son grand courage, qu\'il le fallait, qu\'elle n\'aurait plus de repos ni de joie, si elle agissait autrement.
FRENCH   Puis, ces dames se rencontrèrent une fois encore dans le salon oriental.
FRENCH    Il la regarda, puis il se remit à marcher.
FRENCH    -- Comment! madame, vous vous êtes risquée! s\'écria gaiement Bouthemont, dès qu\'il aperçut Mme Desforges.
ENGLISH   But, slowly, he turned round and looked at her, and his thick lips trembled.
ENGLISH   She handed Madame Bourdelais over to one of her saleswomen and came back to her brothers in a corner of the department, which was, fortunately, getting clearer.
ENGLISH   Then it was the cloth that was too heavy or of no good whatever.
FRENCH   Ne lui avait-elle pas avoué, un soir, qu\'elle aimait quelqu\'un? Depuis ce moment, il portait en plein coeur, enfoncé comme un couteau, cet aveu arraché dans une heure de trouble.
ENGLISH   An old love story floated in her memory, the story of a sailor\'s betrothed whom her love guarded from all perils.
FRENCH    Le fiacre roulait, on arriva à la gare de Vincennes, juste pour un train.
FRENCH    -- Vous souffrez, ma cousine? lui demanda-t-elle.
ENGLISH   Quite white-haired already, deadened by his sedentary life, he had a flabby, colourless face, blanched and worn, as it were, by the reflection of the money he was continually handling.
ENGLISH   The father half fainted away, asking himself where this continual stream of goods could go to; whilst the mother, sickening at thought of her daughter\'s torture, continued gazing blankly into the street, her eyes blurred by big tears.
ENGLISH    [1] In the great Paris magasins de nouveautés such as the Louvre and Bon Marché there have been at various stages numerous intéressés, that is partners of a kind who whilst entitled to some share of the profits, exercise but a strictly limited control in the management of the establishment\'s affairs.--_Trans._  \"And you,\" resumed he, familiarly, \"have you slept Well?\"  When Mouret replied that he had not been to bed, he shook his head, murmuring: \"Bad habits.\"  \"Why?\" replied the other, gaily.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! my dear,\" stammered Pauline, very red, \"don\'t say anything, will you?\"  Baugé, with his big limbs and giant stature, was trembling like a little boy.
ENGLISH    At last they arrived in the dress and costume department.
ENGLISH   But he did not even see her; he no longer remembered the little girl whom a momentary impression had induced him to support.
FRENCH   Déjà, la plaie laissée à son flanc par la démolition de la masure de Bourras, se trouvait si bien cicatrisée, qu\'on aurait vainement cherché la place de cette verrue ancienne; les quatre façades filaient le long des quatre rues, sans une lacune, dans leur isolement superbe.
FRENCH   C\'est dégoûtant, ça coule dans la nourriture.
FRENCH    -- Sans doute, reprit le baron en riant.
FRENCH   À votre place, j\'aurais peur, car il est trop gentil pour vous.
FRENCH   Mais tes affaires sont tes affaires.
FRENCH   Maintenant, Mme Marty avait la face animée et nerveuse d\'une enfant qui a bu du vin pur.
ENGLISH   Every time The Ladies\' Paradise created new departments there were fresh failures among the shopkeepers of the district.
ENGLISH   It was this price that caused a revolution among the women; it was two sous less than that charged at The Ladies\' Paradise, and the silk appeared more substantial.
FRENCH   Avait-elle donc une autre place en vue? il était tout prêt à lui donner les avantages qu\'elle espérait obtenir ailleurs.
ENGLISH   He harboured a mixed sentiment with regard to Denise, a commingling, as it were, of sympathy and anger.
ENGLISH   \"You should take an omelet.\"  \"Oh! the beef is enough for me,\" replied the young girl, who, in order to avoid expense, contented herself with the food provided by the house, no matter how repugnant it might be.
ENGLISH   \"You want me to go there?\"  Denise herself was affected by his emotion.
ENGLISH   Fatigue prevented her from thinking.
ENGLISH    \"Of course, or I should not have come.
FRENCH   Oh! une trouvaille! Vingt francs!  Et, dès lors, le sac devint inépuisable.
ENGLISH    It was freezing in the room, the cold seemed to run down the bare prison-like walls; but they were so fully taken up by their conversation that they did not notice that their fingers were almost frost-bitten.
ENGLISH   on our goods, there is only a net profit of four per cent.
FRENCH   Pourquoi?  -- C\'est que je viens de voir dans l\'antichambre une jeune fille...
FRENCH    VIII   Cependant, tout le quartier causait de la grande voie qu\'on allait ouvrir, du nouvel Opéra à la Bourse, sous le nom de rue du Dix- Décembre.
ENGLISH   \"Oh! Monsieur Mouret! Pray say no more.
ENGLISH    \"You love some one, do you not?\" he resumed, in a trembling voice.
ENGLISH   And those three fair ones, poorly clad in black, that sad-looking girl between the pretty child and the handsome youth, looked so strange yet so charming standing there on the pavement, that the passers-by glanced back smilingly.
FRENCH   Elle-même n\'aspirait-elle pas à l\'oubli? Tout allait finir, elle ne demandait plus à ses forces épuisées que le courage de la séparation.
FRENCH   Elle marchait d\'un pas difficile, à cause de son pied.
FRENCH   Et, quand elle le quitta, il allait, il allait toujours, dans cette locomotion entêtée des grands désespoirs qui tournent sur eux-mêmes, sans pouvoir en sortir jamais.
FRENCH    -- Madame est un peu forte...
FRENCH   Tout l\'après-midi, il sembla revenu à sa gaieté d\'homme bien portant.
ENGLISH    \"What! you are up!\" exclaimed the first-hand.
ENGLISH   Oh! nothing dangerous, however!\"  But he suddenly pretended to catch sight of Madame Guibal, and hastened off, approaching her bareheaded, whilst the others merely bowed to her from a distance.
ENGLISH    \"You might have warned us,\" he resumed, gradually getting angry at his own harshness.
ENGLISH   I alone am mistress here.
ENGLISH   He was continually to be seen on the other side of the street, on the threshold of The Old Elbeuf, his eyes raised and never quitting the young ladies of the jacket and mantle department.
FRENCH   Envoyé à Paris par son père, qui tenait là-bas un magasin de nouveautés, il avait absolument refusé de retourner au pays, quand le bonhomme s\'était dit que le garçon en savait assez long pour lui succéder dans son commerce; et, dès lors, une rivalité avait grandi entre le père et le fils, le premier tout à son petit négoce provincial, indigné de voir un simple commis gagner le triple de ce qu\'il gagnait lui-même, le second plaisantant la routine du vieux, faisant sonner ses gains et bouleversant la maison, à chacun de ses passages.
FRENCH   Elle la retenait, elle bégayait:  -- Non, non, restez...
ENGLISH   \"Uncle,\" said she, \"you can\'t stay like this.
FRENCH   Elle avait vu son amie se mettre en jupon et en corset, elle la regardait préparer le lit, l\'ouvrir, taper les oreillers de ses bras nus; et ce petit ménage d\'une nuit d\'amour, fait devant elle, la troublait, lui causait une honte, en éveillant de nouveau, dans son coeur blessé, le souvenir de Hutin.
FRENCH   On y vit les frères Vanpouille, blêmes de leurs échéances de décembre, payées par un suprême effort qu\'ils ne pourraient recommencer.
FRENCH   Mais, auparavant, elle força Denise à accepter les six francs qui lui manquaient, en la suppliant de ne pas se gêner, de ne les rendre que lorsqu\'elle gagnerait davantage.
ENGLISH   Why did they not put the dresses and costumes near the mantles department? It _is_ a mess!\"  Madame Marty, whose eyes were sparkling, intoxicated by the succession of riches dancing before her, repeated in an undertone: \"Oh, dear! What will my husband say? You are right, there is no order in this place.
ENGLISH   She had recognised Deloche\'s voice.
FRENCH   Le silence lourd, coupé de respirations lointaines, élargissait encore ces ténèbres.
ENGLISH   I don\'t wish to see anything else.\"  However, as she crossed the scarf and glove departments, her heart once more failed her.
ENGLISH    The struggle between the men of the silk department and their second-hand occupied all the counters.
ENGLISH   So I came in all the same but haven\'t said anything to anybody.
ENGLISH   Your studies cannot be interrupted,\" said she.
ENGLISH    \"This one makes me look a fright,\" Madame Boutarel was saying.
FRENCH   Là, elle était allongée, si fluette sous les couvertures, qu\'on ne sentait même plus la forme et l\'existence d\'un corps.
ENGLISH   Up above on a corner of the ceiling of her old room, she once more perceived that name--Ernestine--written in black and shaky letters with the flame of a candle; and the remembrance of her days of misery came back to her, inspiring her with a tender sympathy for all suffering.
ENGLISH   You know what I\'m doing?\"  \"Yes,\" said Vallagnosc, \"I heard you were in business.
ENGLISH   What had they all been saying then? She could not be a questionable character; she must have had a real husband--that is unless she were in mourning for her mother.
ENGLISH    \"Things seem to be picking up a bit,\" said Hutin to Favier.
FRENCH   Les femmes le trouvaient gentil.
FRENCH    Les uns l\'aimaient, les autres trouvaient ça trop mastic.
FRENCH   Donnez-moi votre bras.
ENGLISH   Yet Mouret in the midst of all this excitement, preserved a triumphant gaiety, a certainty of gaining millions, like a man so worshipped by women, that there could be no question of betrayal.
FRENCH    -- Est-ce qu\'ils en ont, des têtes de chien comme ça?  Et il clignait les yeux derrière ses lunettes, pour juger la tête de dogue qu\'il sculptait, la lèvre retroussée, les crocs dehors, dans un grognement plein de vie.
FRENCH   Il vous chargeait de commissions pour elle, n\'est-ce pas?...
ENGLISH   I must tell you that everybody here has the same idea: yes, they are convinced that you are riding the high horse, in order to make him take you to church.
FRENCH   Mais presque aussitôt la porte se rouvrit, deux dames furent introduites.
ENGLISH   They can sell at a franc or two francs cheaper than we can.
ENGLISH   He had already sold Madame Desforges a dozen pairs of kid gloves, the Paradise gloves, one of the specialties of the house.
FRENCH   Bientôt les yeux s\'accoutumaient: à gauche, la galerie Monsigny allongeait les promontoires blancs des toiles et des calicots, les roches blanches des draps de lit, des serviettes, des mouchoirs; tandis que la galerie Michodière, à droite, occupée par la mercerie, la bonneterie et les lainages, exposait des constructions blanches en boutons de nacre, un grand décor bâti avec des chaussettes blanches, toute une salle recouverte de molleton blanc, éclairée au loin d\'un coup de lumière.
ENGLISH   He hardly dared to ask him any questions, knowing how Mouret received people in these critical moments.
FRENCH    Mme Baudu, l\'autre commis et la demoiselle, vinrent s\'attabler à leur tour.
FRENCH   Mouret avait levé les yeux; puis, continuant de signer:  -- Vous avez bien dormi, Bourdoncle?  -- Très bien, merci, répondit le jeune homme, qui marchait à petits pas, comme chez lui.
ENGLISH    Mouret had succeeded in concealing his great distress of mind; still his voice trembled somewhat with emotion: \"No doubt; but I don\'t know which.\"  \"It\'s the little fair girl from the mantle department,\" replied Madame Marty, obligingly, \"the second-hand, I believe.\"  Henriette looked at Mouret in her turn.
FRENCH    -- Taisez-vous! dit-elle rapidement.
FRENCH   On voulait donc ameuter les mères, froisser les jeunes accouchées de la clientèle? Pompeusement, il fut décidé que toute vendeuse mariée qui deviendrait enceinte, serait mise chez une sage-femme spéciale, dès que sa présence au comptoir blesserait les bonnes moeurs.
FRENCH    Puis, un instinct lui fit lever la tête, pendant qu\'un inspecteur ouvrait la porte, fermée depuis le matin.
FRENCH    Cependant, Denise, au milieu de ce coup de balai, était si menacée, qu\'elle vivait dans la continuelle attente d\'une catastrophe.
FRENCH    -- Laissez-les donc! répétait Pauline, des poseuses qui sont bêtes comme des oies!  Mais c\'était justement ces allures de dame qui intimidaient la jeune fille.
FRENCH    Aux soieries, le retour de Robineau avait déchaîné toute une révolution.
FRENCH    Le domestique annonça:  -- M.
ENGLISH   Was it possible that he had married into a family of thieves? A stupid marriage that he had drifted into, just to please his wife\'s father! Surprised by his childish violence, Mouret watched him weeping, thinking the while of his former pessimist boasting.
ENGLISH   Thereupon Mouret, in embarrassment, affected to laugh.
ENGLISH   Something truly virginal!\"  Then Monsieur de Boves, who had doubtless observed the distressful glances with which his wife was following the fan, at last added his word to the conversation.
ENGLISH   It was an unreasonable longing to be vanquished amidst his victory, the nonsense of a warrior bending beneath the caprice of a child, on the morrow of his conquests.
FRENCH    -- Sois raisonnable, mon petit.
ENGLISH   But he could endure it no longer.
ENGLISH   Pauline, it was true, had her husband in the house; but still she felt anxious, and in order to postpone a probable dismissal, sought to conceal her state as long as she could.
FRENCH   Peut-être croirait-il cette vilaine histoire, ce rendez-vous avec un homme, au fond des caves.
FRENCH    -- Mais, ma chérie, ce n\'est pas la même chose.
ENGLISH    \"Campion,\" said Mouret to the delivery manager, a retired sergeant with a thin face, \"why weren\'t six pairs of sheets, bought by a lady yesterday about two o\'clock, delivered in the evening?\"  \"Where does the lady live?\" asked the employee.
FRENCH      *** START: FULL LICENSE ***  THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK  To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase \"Project Gutenberg\"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at https://gutenberg.org/license).
FRENCH    Enfin, Denise aborda le sujet qui l\'amenait.
FRENCH   Alors, toute la table s\'égaya.
ENGLISH    \"How is Monsieur Marty?\" asked Madame Desforges.
ENGLISH   But Denise, whom these stories had inspired with a still greater longing to enter The Ladies\' Paradise, instead of turning her from it, retained her quiet gentle demeanour beneath which lurked a genuine Norman obstinacy.
ENGLISH   Clara Prunaire, daughter of a clogmaker of the woods of Vivet had begun to misconduct herself at the time when she was employed as needlewoman at the Château de Mareuil.
FRENCH   Il ne comptait pas sur cinq cent trente-quatre lettres, un mardi.
FRENCH   Ah! tout cela est changé, bien changé!  Elle secouait la tête, ses paroles lentes disaient le drame de sa vie.
ENGLISH   I\'ve not slept well, that\'s all.\"  It was the twentieth of July, and the panic caused by the dismissals was at its height.
FRENCH   Le petit commerce y laissera encore une aile.
FRENCH   Puis, vous m\'avez eu l\'air si triste, ce soir, à table!  Denise la remerciait, la priait de s\'asseoir, touchée de son air de bonne fille.
ENGLISH   \"I was six years old; my mother used to take me to Valognes market in a cart,\" he said.
FRENCH    -- Non, merci, je n\'ai besoin de rien, déclara Mme Marty.
FRENCH   Cependant, le bienheureux jour approchait, ces demoiselles ne tarissaient plus, racontaient des préparatifs de toilette, comme si elles partaient pour un voyage de six mois; tandis que Denise devait les entendre, pâle et silencieuse dans son abandon.
FRENCH    -- Taisez-vous, ça ne regarde personne...
FRENCH    Et il eut un geste vague, pour dire que ces choses ne l\'intéressaient plus.
ENGLISH   A tenacious hope sustained them, and they still predicted the approaching discomfiture of The Ladies\' Paradise.
ENGLISH   They laughed and shrugged their shoulders, and she felt wounded to the heart.
FRENCH   Enfin, il y avait les femmes enceintes, dont les vols se spécialisaient: ainsi, chez une d\'elles, le commissaire de police avait découvert deux cent quarante-huit paires de gants roses, volées dans tous les comptoirs de Paris.
FRENCH   Des bruits d\'eau chantaient, des bruits mystérieux dont la tôle gardait toujours la vibration musicale.
ENGLISH   Now and again he let slip a confession.
FRENCH   Un instant, l\'idée d\'une promenade en canot fut discutée; puis, ils l\'abandonnèrent, Baugé ramait trop mal.
ENGLISH   She was still unable to understand her friend\'s refusal.
FRENCH    La plaie de cette injustice saignait encore chez Robineau.
ENGLISH   Mademoiselle Tatin, of the under-linen shop in the Passage Choiseul, had just been declared bankrupt; Quinette, the glover, could hardly hold out another six months; the furriers, Vanpouille, were obliged to sub-let a part of their premises; and if the Bédorés, brother and sister, still kept on as hosiers, in the Rue Gaillon, they were evidently living on the money they had formerly saved.
ENGLISH   He never thought of saving a penny, but spent his salary as soon as he drew it, absolutely indifferent about the future.
FRENCH   Le matin de la grande mise en vente, il n\'avait encore rien décidé, et Denise partait le lendemain.
FRENCH   Parfois, une fillette déjà grande personne, neuf ou dix ans, ayant aux épaules un paletot de drap, l\'étudiait devant la glace, se tournait, la mine absorbée, les yeux luisant du besoin de plaire.
ENGLISH   \"The mantle will fit splendidly.\"  She appeared very calm and smiling.
FRENCH   Puis, ce furent les draps qui étaient trop lourds et qui ne valaient rien.
FRENCH   Mouret, au contraire, affectait des extases, restait devant les femmes ravi et câlin, emporté continuellement dans de nouveaux amours; et ses coups de coeur étaient comme une réclame à sa vente, on eût dit qu\'il enveloppait tout le sexe de la même caresse, pour mieux l\'étourdir et le garder à sa merci.
FRENCH   Tous les vendeurs n\'étaient occupés qu\'à métrer de cette soie; on voyait, au-dessus des chapeaux, luire l\'éclair pâle des lés dépliés, dans le continuel va-et-vient des doigts le long des mètres de chêne, suspendus à des tiges de cuivre; on entendait le bruit des ciseaux mordant le tissu, et cela sans arrêt, au fur et à mesure du déballage, comme s\'il n\'y avait pas eu assez de bras pour suffire aux mains gloutonnes et tendues des clientes.
FRENCH    Mouret se récria.
FRENCH    Mme Aurélie, cependant, fermait le registre.
FRENCH   Mais, selon son habituelle tactique, il poussait Bourdoncle en avant: c\'était Bourdoncle et les autres intéressés qui exigeaient le renvoi, à chaque conseil; tandis que lui résistait, disait-il, défendait son ami énergiquement, au risque des plus gros embarras.
ENGLISH    A joyous laugh stirred up The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   N\'importe! lorsqu\'ils voudront s\'agrandir désormais, il leur faudra jeter des ponts par-dessus les rues...
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! elle m\'inquiète un peu...
ENGLISH   But yet the wounds they make are nice, almost as nice as kisses.
ENGLISH   They had, however, quite a journey before them now that the robes and costumes were installed on the second floor, at the other end of the establishment.
FRENCH    -- Dépêchez-vous, c\'est moi.
FRENCH   C\'était même cette peur qui l\'avait décidé à mettre au plus tôt un lien entre le baron et lui, le lien aimable d\'une femme, si étroit entre les hommes de nature galante.
FRENCH   Mais je le tiens tout de même et je ne le lâche pas.
FRENCH   Ensuite, elle expliqua que, se sentant beaucoup mieux, elle avait désiré prendre l\'air.
FRENCH   Il en gardait une rancune, il voyait en Robineau l\'instrument d\'une bataille décisive, livrée à ces bazars des nouveautés, qu\'il accusait de ruiner la fabrication française.
ENGLISH   As he was aware of Mouret\'s acquaintance with the thief, he treated her with the utmost politeness.
FRENCH    -- Oui! oui, cinq francs soixante, dit vivement Mouret, et si j\'étais seul, je la donnerais à perte.
FRENCH   Imaginez-vous qu\'il débauche les vendeuses! Oui, il leur procure des noeuds de cravate!  -- Silence! murmura Favier.
FRENCH    Un silence régna.
ENGLISH   And, having recognised Mouret, she had immediately bent over her work again.
ENGLISH   You\'re a good little girl, and I know you lead him a hard life, that man who thought you were for sale just like my house.
FRENCH    -- Je devrais appeler un sergent de ville, criait-il au milieu des autres vendeurs.
FRENCH   Naturellement, on se le disputait, il prenait une importance de personnage; et, Baudu, l\'ayant marchandé, eut le malheur de le voir s\'entendre avec les Matignon, de la rue Croix-des-Petits-Champs.
FRENCH   Et il se mit à monter gravement sa faction.
ENGLISH   Business is business, there\'s no getting over that.
ENGLISH   On the Place Gaillon, along the Rue de la Michodière, and the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, there was always a troop of motionless sentries watching for the girls\' departure; and, when the _défilé_ began, each gave his arm to his lady and walked away.
ENGLISH   It was a heavy blow to Robineau, who had not imagined that his rival would lower his price; for this suicidal style of competition, this practice of selling at a loss, was then unknown.
FRENCH   Comment! on ne la servait pas! c\'était impardonnable! Elle devait se montrer indulgente, car on ne savait vraiment plus où donner de la tête.
FRENCH   Je ne m\'attendais guère à être récompensé de cette façon.
FRENCH   Pour tenir encore, il leur fallait tout faire par eux-mêmes; Gaujean, obstiné dans sa rancune, allongeait les crédits, promettait même de leur trouver des fonds; mais la peur les prenait, ils voulaient tenter de l\'économie et de l\'ordre.
FRENCH   Et l\'autre, celle dont il rêvait la nuit, la chair brûlée d\'une telle flamme, qu\'il se jetait tout nu sur le carreau, de peur d\'en mourir!  -- Aujourd\'hui, continua Baudu, voilà un argent qui peut nous sauver.
FRENCH   Il ne s\'occupait plus d\'elle, ne lui adressait de loin en loin une parole que pour la conseiller sur sa toilette et la plaisanter, en fille manquée, en sauvage qui tenait du garçon et dont il ne tirerait jamais une coquette, malgré sa science d\'homme à bonnes fortunes; même il en riait, il descendait jusqu\'à des taquineries, sans vouloir s\'avouer le trouble que lui causait cette petite vendeuse, avec ses cheveux si drôles.
FRENCH    The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
ENGLISH   There were _foulards_ of a cloudy fineness, surahs lighter than the down falling from trees, satined pekins as soft and supple as a Chinese beauty\'s skin.
FRENCH   Toujours debout, appelant en témoignage les voyageurs de l\'impériale, qui s\'étaient levés, eux aussi, pour se pencher et voir le sang, le cocher s\'expliquait avec des gestes exaspérés, la gorge étranglée d\'une colère croissante.
ENGLISH   On reaching the Rue de la Michodière, he was about to enter his establishment when a neighbouring shopkeeper, standing at his door, called to him.
FRENCH   En vain, il battait la maison: l\'idée fixe restait enfoncée entre ses deux yeux, et à mesure que sa puissance se déroulait, que les rouages des services et l\'armée de son personnel défilaient devant lui, il sentait plus profondément l\'injure de son impuissance.
FRENCH    Et, à cette heure dernière, au milieu de cet air surchauffé, les femmes régnaient.
FRENCH   Enfin, il s\'arrêta, et très poliment, d\'une voix qu\'il tâchait de rendre froide, il dit avec simplicité:  -- Oui, madame.
FRENCH   Les nouveautés d\'hiver l\'occupaient, il parla d\'un arrivage considérable de dentelles; et Mme de Boves le questionna sur le prix du point d\'Alençon: elle en achèterait peut-être.
FRENCH   C\'est votre affaire.
FRENCH    -- Un micmac à n\'y rien comprendre! reprit-il.
ENGLISH   Mouret liked to talk in this way without contradiction.
ENGLISH   In the secret warfare which he carried on against the young girl, there was in the first place a natural antipathy.
ENGLISH   They heard his heavy footsteps descending the stairs.
FRENCH   Il se tournait, tâchait de distinguer ses traits, dans la nuit grandissante.
FRENCH   Toutes deux attendaient depuis dix minutes, et elles s\'irritaient, lorsque la rencontre de Mme Bourdelais et de ses trois enfants, les occupa.
FRENCH    Du coup, la passion de Mouret tomba.
ENGLISH   He knew a girl there who was so inexpressibly dignified that customers dared not speak to her for fear of humiliating her.
ENGLISH   The frightened workmen ran out into the street.
FRENCH    -- Va-t\'en! répétait Denise, va-t\'en!...
FRENCH   Pas une n\'aurait seulement vu nos magasins!  -- Mais, fit remarquer Bourdoncle, maintenant que vous avez tout brouillé et tout jeté aux quatre coins, les employés useront leurs jambes, à conduire les acheteuses de rayon en rayon.
ENGLISH   However, she fully hoped to earn twelve hundred francs a year even in this way, knowing that the good saleswomen earned as much as two thousand, when they liked to take the trouble.
FRENCH   Il la guettait, inventait un prétexte, filait derrière elle; puis, il affectait la surprise, quand il la rencontrait, à la porte des confectionneuses.
ENGLISH    \"Hush!\" he murmured, paternally, \"they will hear you.\"  But the ladies were now all speaking at once, so excited that they did not even listen to each other.
ENGLISH   They spoke of treason, accused her of going and repeating their slightest words to their enemies.
ENGLISH   less than our own prices.
ENGLISH   \"Go and join the man you love.
FRENCH    Il avait levé son porte-plume, il le brandissait, et il le pointa dans le vide, comme s\'il eût voulu percer d\'un couteau un coeur invisible.
ENGLISH   The dead winter season was just then approaching, and he made a clean sweep in each department, piling up victims and hustling them into the street.
FRENCH   Et l\'on apercevait encore, à gauche, une laverie, des éviers de pierre larges comme des piscines; tandis que, de l\'autre côté, à droite, se trouvait un garde-manger, où l\'on entrevoyait des viandes rouges, à des crocs d\'acier.
ENGLISH   Then as Madame Desforges began looking for Madame Guibal, she set up an exclamation of surprise on seeing her with Madame Marty.
FRENCH    -- Je ne me fatiguerai pas, madame.
ENGLISH    \"The police ought to clear the public thoroughfares, my word!\" said he, \"They\'ve been blocking up our street for the last eighteen months with the scaffolding of their façade--another man was killed on it the other day.
ENGLISH   Of all the ladies, Madame Marty and her daughter were the only ones to remain, in the final throes of the day\'s sales.
ENGLISH    \"Monsieur Bourras,\" repeated Denise, trying to draw him on one side, \"you know that you will not be abandoned.
FRENCH   Lui, avait fait son droit par tradition de famille; puis, il était demeuré à la charge de sa mère veuve, qui ne savait déjà comment placer ses deux filles.
FRENCH   C\'était la règle de la maison, on balayait tout chaque année, on vendait à soixante pour cent de perte, plutôt que de garder un modèle ancien ou une étoffe défraîchie.
ENGLISH   She certainly did not envy them, she was happy in her solitude, in the unsociableness in which she shut herself up, as in a hiding-place; but all the same her imagination carried her away, she would try to guess things, picture the pleasures constantly described before her, the cafés, the restaurants, the theatres, the Sundays spent on the river and in the country taverns.
ENGLISH   On the morning of the great sale, he had still not decided on anything, and Denise was to leave on the morrow.
ENGLISH   The renowned dressers of the Paradise, Hutin, Mignot, and others, came to look at the change he was carrying out, but they affected not to understand it, theirs being a different school.
ENGLISH   And, as the others seemed astonished, she continued: \"Yes, I saw her yesterday myself taking the child out for a walk! She\'s got it stowed away in the neighbourhood, somewhere.\"  Two days later, Marguerite came up after dinner with another piece of news.
ENGLISH   As second-hand she had charge of the arrangements between her department and the work-room where only the models and alterations were attended to, and was always going up and down to give the necessary orders.
ENGLISH   At this hour, The Ladies\' Paradise, with its furnace-like brilliancy, completed its conquest of her.
FRENCH   Restez donc, nous irons là-haut ensemble.
ENGLISH    \"Mademoiselle Baudu!\" she called, and her puffy Cæsarian countenance assumed the inexorable sternness of sovereign power: \"Go and get paid!\"  The terrible phrase rang out loudly in the empty department.
FRENCH    There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
ENGLISH   Just as paradoxical as ever! However, we\'ve not met to quarrel.
FRENCH   C\'était Mme Desforges, l\'air très gai, allongeant seulement la tête, appelant d\'une voix pressée:  -- Monsieur Mouret! monsieur Mouret!  Puis, quand elle les aperçut:  -- Oh! messieurs, vous permettez, j\'enlève M.
FRENCH   En haut, une demoiselle, habillée de soie, taillait un crayon, pendant que, près d\'elle, deux autres dépliaient des manteaux de velours.
FRENCH   Nous sommes d\'esprit plus large, et s\'il ne peut occuper sa nièce dans sa maison, eh bien! nous lui montrerons que sa nièce n\'a eu qu\'à frapper chez nous pour être accueillie...
ENGLISH   Besides, the public gets the benefit, and that\'s everything.\"  The shopman now began emptying the second case, whilst Bouthemont checked the pieces by the invoice.
ENGLISH    She strove to keep back her tears, but could not do so.
ENGLISH   And whilst waiting for the hearse, which was late, all these people, clad in black and tramping in the mud, cast glances of hatred towards The Ladies\' Paradise, whose bright windows and gay displays seemed an insult in face of The Old Elbeuf, which, with its funeral trappings and glimmering candles, lent an air of mourning to the other side of the street.
FRENCH   Il y a sur elle une histoire d\'officier bien drôle...
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! il faut entrer, déclara Denise.
FRENCH   Mais, devant le jeune homme, Mouret s\'effaça: il répugnait à compromettre sa grâce dans un métier de gendarme, il gardait par goût et par tactique son rôle de dieu aimable.
FRENCH   Déjà il avait vendu à Mme Desforges douze paires de gants de chevreau, des gants Bonheur, la spécialité de la maison.
FRENCH    Toutes ces demoiselles s\'empressaient auprès de Denise.
ENGLISH   Mouret had already moved off, whilst Denise strayed into the depths of the department, accompanied by her brothers and still in search of a disengaged salesman.
ENGLISH    \"It really is a failure, madame,\" replied Mouret, to cut the matter short.
FRENCH   La bière et le café coulaient.
FRENCH    -- Je crois bien que mon jupon va y rester, répétait Mme de Boves.
FRENCH   Elle fit aussi la joie de Lhomme, en appuyant un projet qu\'il nourrissait depuis longtemps, celui de créer un corps de musique, dont les exécutants seraient tous choisis dans le personnel.
FRENCH   Mais, à l\'instant même, Mme Desforges reparut.
ENGLISH   When ever he came near the bed, he leant over his wife and gesticulated, then, returning to the window, he stood silent for a minute, listening to the noise of the works.
ENGLISH   But the central nave especially was filled with a blaze of white: the white muslin \"puffings\" round the columns, the white dimities and piqués draping the staircases, the white counterpanes drooping like banners, the white guipures and laces flying in the air, opened up a firmament of dreamland, a vista of the dazzling whiteness of some paradise, where the marriage of an unknown queen was being celebrated.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! il est six heures, mettons-nous à table, dit Baudu.
FRENCH    -- Vous êtes trop bon...
ENGLISH   The iron staircases developed bold curves, which multiplied the landings; the bridges suspended in space, ran straight along at a great height; and in the white light from the windows all this iron work formed an excessively delicate architecture, an intricate lace-work through which the daylight penetrated, the modern realization of a dreamland palace, of a Babel with storeys piled one above the other, and spacious halls affording glimpses of other floors and other halls _ad infinitum_.
ENGLISH   They would never do anything with such an ugly creature, he had always said so; and he seemed to be indulging a spiteful feeling.
ENGLISH   But she perturbed him, so he yielded, and abandoned the Alençon point for a moment in order to take the lace she had asked for from a drawer.
ENGLISH   Every sort of voice was heard too, shrill, full, deep, and husky, figures whizzed through the air and a rustling clamour reigned in the immense nave--the clamour of forests in January when the wind whistles through the branches.
ENGLISH   For a fortnight she had been unable to go down into the shop which a charwoman now looked after.
ENGLISH   We have explained the matter to you, that\'s all.
FRENCH    -- Ah! enfin! dit-elle en poussant un soupir.
FRENCH    -- J\'ai vu passer votre mari sur la place Gaillon, murmura Denise, qui avait fini par entrer dans la boutique.
FRENCH    -- Je la veux, je l\'aurai!...
FRENCH    Bourdoncle s\'humiliait, ravi du reste d\'être dans son tort.
FRENCH    Denise, rentrée chez elle, se sentit défaillir.
FRENCH   Était-ce donc si bête, l\'amour? Quoi! ce garçon qui avait tout un bonheur sous la main, et qui gâtait sa vie, et qui adorait une gueuse comme un saint-sacrement! À partir de ce jour, elle éprouva un serrement de coeur, chaque fois qu\'elle aperçut, derrière les carreaux verdâtres du Vieil Elbeuf, le profil pâle et souffrant de Geneviève.
ENGLISH   She seemed annoyed at the meeting; but quickly recovering herself, related that she had come to sit down for a moment in order to escape the crush.
ENGLISH   You may be quite easy.
FRENCH   J\'y songe sérieusement.
ENGLISH   The director deigned to laugh so all the young ladies ventured to do the same.
FRENCH   C\'est moi qui vous récompenserai.
FRENCH    Et il s\'approchait encore.
ENGLISH    As early as six o\'clock, Mouret was on the spot, giving his final orders.
ENGLISH    \"We excuse these moments of weakness, madame,\" said he.
ENGLISH    \"Why, the women.
FRENCH   Après quelques pas faits en silence, il balbutia:  -- Enfin, vous ne m\'aimez pas?  Et, comme elle lui évitait le chagrin d\'un non brutal, il reprit d\'une voix douce et navrée:  -- D\'ailleurs, je m\'y attendais...
FRENCH   Non, non, il n\'avait aucun remords, il faisait simplement la besogne de son âge, et elle le savait bien, elle qui aimait la vie, qui avait la passion des affaires larges, conclues au plein jour de la publicité.
FRENCH   Madame devait avoir une raison pour les rendre; si c\'étaient les dessins ou les couleurs qui n\'allaient pas à madame, il lui montrerait autre chose, il avait un assortiment très complet.
ENGLISH   The voices began calling again and the pens sputtered, whilst Clara hastened to pick up the garments.
FRENCH   Enfin, grâce à ses coudes vigoureux, Hutin ouvrit un chemin à ces dames en marchant devant elles.
FRENCH   Les vitrines se noyaient, on ne distinguait plus, en face, que la neige des dentelles, dont les verres dépolis d\'une rampe de gaz avivaient le blanc; et, sur ce fond de chapelle, les confections s\'enlevaient en vigueur, le grand manteau de velours, garni de renard argenté, mettait le profil d\'une femme sans tête, qui courait par l\'averse à quelque fête, dans l\'inconnu des ténèbres de Paris.
FRENCH   Et la réconciliation fut complète.
FRENCH    -- Il est bête, fit remarquer la voix, il va prendre du mal.
FRENCH   Cependant, au Bon Marché, il se faisait trois mille cinq cents francs.
ENGLISH   No! no! she could not accept such a dismissal.
FRENCH   Attendez de savoir, pour servir les clientes connues.
ENGLISH   To act, to create, to struggle against facts, to overcome them or be overthrown by them, all human health and joy consists in that!\"  \"A mere way of diverting one\'s self,\" murmured the other.
FRENCH   Ces dames allongeaient le cou, lorsque, dans le silence, on entendit le timbre de l\'antichambre.
FRENCH    -- Mon garçon, commença-t-il, tu sais que j\'ai vendu ma propriété de Rambouillet.
ENGLISH   She finished by saying to the shopman who was showing her the _matelassé_:  \"Well--no; I\'m going to the silk department; you\'ve nothing to suit me.\"  The shopman then took up the articles already purchased and walked off before the ladies.
FRENCH   Je comprends que les vieux entêtés, comme Bourras et Baudu, y restent; mais nous autres, qui étions jeunes, qui acceptions le nouveau train des choses!...
ENGLISH   No doubt she well knew that he merely came to her house to meet the baron; still he might have avoided throwing his indifference in her face like that.
FRENCH   On envahissait jusqu\'au rayon de l\'ameublement, le plus calme d\'ordinaire.
ENGLISH   And that idiotic million lying there! He suffered from it as from a sort of irony, he could have kicked it into the street.
ENGLISH   \"My dear Lhomme, your son Albert is a careless fellow, who should take an example from you.\" Then, changing the subject, showing himself more amiable than ever, he continued: \"And by the way, how about that concert the other day--did you get a good seat?\"  A blush spread over the white cheeks of the old cashier.
ENGLISH   If you ever see him again, tell him I forgive him.
FRENCH   Viens-tu, Blanche?  Et elle monta, suivie de sa fille, pendant que l\'inspecteur Jouve, toujours à sa suite, allait prendre un escalier voisin, pour ne pas attirer son attention.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! reprit-elle d\'un ton qu\'elle tâcha de rendre plaisant, je ne vous rendrai pas votre flatterie, vous n\'avez guère bonne mine, ce soir.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! oui, j\'ai voulu me rendre compte.
ENGLISH   When a kitchen-help brought in some large tin dishes, Hutin cried out: \"Baked rice! this is a finisher!\"  \"Good for a penn\'orth of gum!\" said Favier, serving himself.
ENGLISH   One evening, completely conquered, she was sobbing, in one of those despairing straits which drive women on to the streets, or into the Seine, when old Bourras gently knocked at the door.
ENGLISH    \"The fact is,\" he continued, getting more confused than ever, \"I thought of applying to see if I could get an engagement, and you might have given me a little information.\"  He was as timid as she was, and had probably risked speaking to her because he divined that she was trembling like himself.
FRENCH   Qu\'avaient-ils donc tous? Pourquoi se tourmenter de la sorte? Elle s\'estimait très heureuse de n\'aimer personne.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! it\'s quite right, when folks like each other, and can do it,\" at last said Denise, smiling, with a view to making herself agreeable.
ENGLISH   The red carpet stifled all noise of footsteps here, and the distant roar from the ground-floor died away, giving place to a discreet murmur and a drawing-room warmth, increased by the presence of so many women.
ENGLISH   But as soon as he could get near his sister, he whispered to her: \"It\'s all the fault of a little laundry-girl.
ENGLISH   And now there was another explosion of gossip.
FRENCH   Elle, toute seule, pleurait dans le silence, devant les épingles semées sur la toilette et sur le parquet.
ENGLISH   \"Don\'t push him too far, madame, or he\'ll tell you that all the old families of France ought to sell calico.\"  \"Well,\" declared Mouret, \"it would at least be an honourable end for a great many of them.\"  They set up a laugh, the paradox seemed far fetched.
ENGLISH   The idea of getting goods below cost price awoke in them all the natural greed of woman, whose enjoyment in purchasing is doubled when she thinks that she is robbing the tradesman.
FRENCH   On en causait au Bonheur, on trouvait l\'aventure drôle.
FRENCH    Denise se prenait d\'affection, en voyant leur tendresse.
ENGLISH   It was inspector Jouve, who had taken upon himself to pull it to.
ENGLISH   \"Boiled beef and pungent sauce, or skate.
FRENCH   Tiens! laisse- nous causer.
ENGLISH   Similar fans could be had, ready mounted, for a hundred and twenty francs, and she named a shop in the Rue Poissonnière where she had seen them.
ENGLISH    \"Yes, yes.
ENGLISH   Denise, however, could not bear to hear him accuse himself, and carried away by her emotion, on seeing him so humble, with his eyes full of tears, he who used formerly to reign there as an absolute and scolding master, she told him everything.
FRENCH   Était-ce possible? cet enfant le torturait à ce point! Toujours il la revoyait arrivant au Bonheur, avec ses gros souliers, sa mince robe noire, son air sauvage.
FRENCH    Cependant, Bouthemont était demeuré immobile dans son fauteuil.
FRENCH   Jean travaillait bien chez un ébéniste, un réparateur de meubles anciens; mais il ne touchait pas un sou.
FRENCH    La jeune femme l\'écoutait, toute blanche, sans comprendre nettement encore.
FRENCH   Dans le magasin, des employés s\'étonnaient.
ENGLISH   He thoroughly believed her, and thought it very ingenious.
FRENCH    Un des becs de gaz sifflait; et, dans l\'air étouffé et moite de la pièce, on n\'entendit plus que ce souffle ardent.
FRENCH   Dites donc, s\'il m\'arrivait malheur, vous parleriez pour moi? Oui, oui, ne prenez pas votre air étonné, on sait qu\'un mot de vous révolutionnerait la maison.
ENGLISH   And all at once he experienced violent emotion, and rushed forward, for he had heard in the distance a deep murmur, which had gradually increased.
FRENCH   De longs remous brisaient la cohue, la fièvre de cette journée de grande vente passait comme un vertige, roulant la houle désordonnée des têtes.
FRENCH   Et l\'idée de son oncle entrant en face, se promenant là en cravate blanche, lui faisait sauter le coeur de pitié et de révolte.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle discovered them first.
ENGLISH   Be good enough to carry the parcel to pay-desk No.
ENGLISH    \"So you\'ve given it up as well?\" exclaimed Madame de Boves, gaily.
FRENCH    Le commis, qu\'elle tenait depuis vingt minutes, n\'osait résister, tellement elle avait grand air, avec sa taille et sa voix de princesse.
FRENCH   Il eut à son tour un faible sourire, il la reconduisit jusqu\'à la porte, comme une dame.
ENGLISH    \"Don\'t be anxious, there\'s no immediate danger.
FRENCH   De cette façon, le contrôle était des plus faciles, il suffisait de collationner les notes remises par la caisse au bureau de défalcation, avec les souches restées entre les mains des commis.
ENGLISH   Besides, why do you display such a quantity of goods? It serves you right, if you are robbed.
FRENCH    Cependant, Mouret, qui ne quittait plus du regard M.
FRENCH   Cette famille avait coûté gros, et Baudu s\'était achevé, en achetant à Rambouillet, le pays du père de sa femme, une grande baraque de maison.
FRENCH   Au plafond, les ors prodigués, les vitres niellées d\'or et les rosaces d\'or semblaient un coup de soleil, luisant sur les Alpes de la grande exposition de blanc.
FRENCH   Toute leur jeunesse s\'éveillait, le vieux collège de Plassans, avec ses deux cours, ses études humides, et le réfectoire où l\'on mangeait tant de morue, et le dortoir où les oreillers volaient de lit en lit, dès que le pion ronflait.
FRENCH    Elle s\'écria violemment:  -- Il fallait l\'amener.
FRENCH    -- Eh! dit enfin Mouret, quand il put parler, on vend ce qu\'on veut, lorsqu\'on sait vendre! Notre triomphe est là.
FRENCH   Mouret les avait accompagnées, et il les retint un instant encore, pour leur montrer l\'inspecteur Jouve, qui filait toujours la femme enceinte et son amie.
ENGLISH   No doubt he could have seen the financier at his office, and have there talked the affair over at his ease; but he felt that he would be stronger in Henriette\'s house.
FRENCH    -- Hein? suis-je enfant?...
ENGLISH   discount.
ENGLISH   At last, after crossing the counterpane department, a room hung with white banners, she arrived at the handkerchief counter, the ingenious decoration of which delighted the throng; everything here was arranged in white columns, white pyramids, white castles, an intricate architecture, solely composed of handkerchiefs, some of lawn, others of cambric, Irish linen, or China silk, some marked, some embroidered by hand, some trimmed with lace, some hemstitched, and some woven with vignettes; the whole forming a city of white bricks of infinite variety, standing out mirage-like against an Eastern sky, warmed to a white heat.
FRENCH    -- Allons, la mienne est tendre tout de même, reprit Mignot.
ENGLISH   And the reason of her departure was the very judgment which, to her continual surprise, was passed upon her conduct.
ENGLISH   \"But, on my word, I cannot discover anything.\"  And yet stories were circulating, there was quite a current of abominable tittle-tattle running beneath the flattery and respect which Denise felt arising around her.
FRENCH   Ce ne serait pas avec ses mille francs d\'appointements qu\'il s\'engraisserait, s\'il ne vendait rien; d\'habitude, il se faisait sept ou huit francs de tant pour cent et de guelte, ce qui lui donnait, avec son fixe, une dizaine de francs par jour, en moyenne.
ENGLISH   Mouret scaled the ladders, discussing with the architect the ornamentation which was to be something quite new, scrambled over the heaps of brick and iron, and even went down into the cellars; and the roar of the steam-engine, the tic-tac of the trowels, the loud noise of the hammers and the clamour of the army of workmen in this immense cage surrounded by sound-reëchoing planks, really diverted him for an instant.
ENGLISH   \"But it seems that the hotel belonged to the Crédit Immobilier, whose president, Baron Hartmann, has just sold it to our famous Mouret.
FRENCH    Mme Aurélie l\'écarta d\'un regard sévère, en murmurant:  -- Il n\'y a pas de tour, je suis la seule maîtresse ici...
FRENCH    -- Quand on se plaît et qu\'on le peut, crut devoir dire Denise en souriant, pour se montrer aimable.
ENGLISH   But at thought of the danger to which that large flounce had exposed him, an icy shiver sped down his back; and as Mouret was just at that moment affirming that the new shops increased the comfort of middle-class households, he glared at him with a terrible expression, the flash of hatred of a timid man who would like to throttle the destroyer but dares not.
FRENCH   Mme de Boves, qui l\'écoutait, se voyait entre deux gendarmes, avec ses quarante cinq ans, son luxe, la haute situation de son mari; et elle était sans remords, elle songeait qu\'elle aurait dû glisser le coupon dans sa manche.
FRENCH   Elle-même n\'aurait pu expliquer comment elle résistait, sous la menace de la faim, et dans le trouble des désirs dont on chauffait l\'air autour d\'elle.
FRENCH   Outre les volants de point d\'Alençon, douze mètres à mille francs, cachés au fond d\'une manche, elles trouvèrent, dans la gorge, aplatis et chauds, un mouchoir, un éventail, une cravate, en tout pour quatorze mille francs de dentelles environ.
FRENCH   Entrez donc.
FRENCH   Plusieurs fois, maman m\'a interrogée.
FRENCH   Ils baissèrent la voix, ils cherchèrent des vexations nouvelles.
FRENCH   Dans les découpures des charpentes de fer, le long des escaliers, sur les ponts volants, c\'était ensuite une ascension sans fin de petites figures, comme égarées au milieu de pics neigeux.
ENGLISH    \"No, sir, nothing yet,\" replied the inspector.
FRENCH   C\'était une femme superbe, à encolure de déesse, avec une grande face régulière et de larges yeux dormants, que son mari, inspecteur général des haras, avait épousée pour sa beauté.
ENGLISH   Out of doors an ardent blue sky was warming the streets, cabs were rolling towards the railway stations, the whole population of Paris rigged out in Sunday attire was streaming towards the suburban woods.
FRENCH   Les soupiraux, de place en place, jetaient une clarté pâle; et, au fond des coins noirs, le long d\'étroits corridors, des becs de gaz brûlaient, continuellement.
ENGLISH   There remains the north, where one might start a rival establishment to the Place Clichy.
ENGLISH    \"Really, sir, you are too kind.
ENGLISH   However, as the other went on adding still viler and viler stories of the girl, he had at last called him a liar, feeling mad with rage.
FRENCH   Elle venait de nommer Albert Lhomme.
ENGLISH    \"If this rascal says anything,\" resumed Jean, \"the husband, who has a big knife----\"  \"But where do you expect me to find fifteen francs?\" exclaimed Denise in despair.
FRENCH   Une veilleuse éclairait faiblement le vestibule, Denise se trouva dans cette lueur, hésitante, prise d\'une inquiétude, car en tournant le coin de la rue, elle avait vu la porte se refermer sur l\'ombre vague d\'un homme.
ENGLISH   Henriette stood waiting, with her ear towards the door.
ENGLISH   Ah! they\'ve bought the house, and think they\'ve got me now! Well! it\'s all over, they shan\'t have it! I might have given way, perhaps; but now it belongs to them, let them try to take it!\"  \"So the news is true?\" said Baudu, in his slow voice.
ENGLISH   Her life too was a pretty pleasant one, notwithstanding its fatigue and the little money she earned.
FRENCH   Et vous êtes toutes bien peu raisonnables, de vous amuser à des gamineries, quand notre temps est si précieux.
ENGLISH    \"In that case, we will commence,\" said her uncle and turning towards the dim depths of the shop, he added:  \"You may as well dine with us, Colomban.
FRENCH   Il l\'invite pour ce soir.
ENGLISH   Madame Desforges, to avoid the crush on the stairs, spoke of going up in the lift; but they had to abandon the idea, there were so many people waiting their turn.
FRENCH    -- Je ne suis pas bossue peut-être...
FRENCH   Il prit sa place habituelle au milieu de ces dames, il retrouva toute sa grâce.
ENGLISH    \"Mademoiselle Prunaire!\" cried out Hutin.
ENGLISH   Denise, listening as to a fairy tale, slightly shuddered; the sense of fear which had mingled with the temptation she had felt since morning, was due, perhaps, to the presence of that woman\'s blood, which she fancied she could now detect in the red mortar of the basement.
FRENCH   Un instant, il avait éprouvé des inquiétudes, troublé de sentir contre lui une femme, cette Mme Desforges, à laquelle il devait un peu sa fortune.
ENGLISH    \"On the first floor, ladies,\" said he, without ceasing to smile.
FRENCH    -- Non, vous lui expliquerez vous-même l\'affaire, répondit-elle, cessant de le tutoyer.
FRENCH   Maintenant elle fuyait.
ENGLISH   When he returned with a flushed face, talking in an animated way of the boulevards, she looked at him with such a sad expression that he blushed with shame.
FRENCH    -- Mais les femmes...
ENGLISH    Hutin had to take up Madame Marty\'s purchases and walk off before the ladies to show them to the mantle department.
FRENCH   Elle se moque bien de vous!  -- Pas tant que je me moque d\'elle, répondit le vendeur vexé.
FRENCH   Il n\'était pas un homme, elle l\'employait aux usages intimes avec son dédain familier des gens à son service, sans le regarder même.
ENGLISH   Wasn\'t the money as much his as hers? He loved her dearly, and she wanted nothing more; she gave him everything, her heart and her life.
FRENCH   Et ils se rattrapent avec les petites maisons comme la vôtre.
FRENCH   Enfin, le chef du départ découvrit l\'erreur: la caisse avait donné un faux numéro et le paquet était revenu.
ENGLISH   At first he did not meddle with the sale, but after smiling at Denise stood there, looking at Madame Bourdelais.
ENGLISH   He would certainly refuse her nothing; she felt sure that he would accord all reasonable compensations.
FRENCH    Justement, Mme Desforges, après avoir failli laisser son manteau dans la foule, entrait enfin et traversait le premier hall.
FRENCH    Cependant, les magasins vivaient, du monde assiégeait les ascenseurs, on s\'écrasait au buffet et au salon de lecture, tout un peuple voyageait au milieu de ces espaces couverts de neige.
ENGLISH   Yes, she would go away.
FRENCH    Du reste, Denise était maintenant au sommet.
ENGLISH   One of them, tall and thin, with a long head, and a run-away-horse appearance, was leaning against a cupboard, as if already knocked up with fatigue.
ENGLISH   If the continual fight for money had not abolished all sexual difference, the unceasing press of business which occupied their minds and fatigued their bodies would have sufficed to stifle desire.
FRENCH   Les petits, ainsi qu\'elle les nommait encore, étaient à cette heure de grands gaillards.
FRENCH    -- Dites donc, cria-t-il, êtes-vous toujours vertueux, au Bon Marché?  -- Pas tant que ça, répondit l\'autre très rouge.
ENGLISH   But when Bouthemont came to the story of the neckties, Bourdoncle got angry.
ENGLISH   Then he was above all exasperated at having missed a genial idea which had occurred to Bouthemont, who had prevailed on the vicar of the Madeleine to bless his establishment, followed by all his clergy; an astonishing ceremony, a religious pomp paraded from the silk department to the glove department, and so on throughout the building.
FRENCH   Lui, personnellement, se sentait perdu, s\'il ne rentrait pas en grâce.
ENGLISH    \"Well!\" resumed Pauline, \"there\'s a family for you! the mother is at Rambouillet, the father in Paris, and the son at Joinville; they won\'t tread on one another\'s toes to-day!\"  Denise, though she detested noise, was smiling and tasting the delight of being unable to think, amid such uproar.
ENGLISH   In all there were now thirty-nine departments with eighteen hundred employees, two hundred of whom were women.
FRENCH   Je vous aime, Denise...
ENGLISH    Mouret gave way to a gesture of gloomy discouragement.
ENGLISH       CHAPTER I.
ENGLISH   So now they were in no hurry, but prolonged the meal, being in no wise anxious to go back to work before time.
FRENCH   Et il y avait encore, entre les deux fenêtres, une petite imprimerie, pour les étiquettes.
ENGLISH    \"Pass the wine,\" said she to Denise.
FRENCH    -- Oh! le boeuf me suffit, répondit la jeune fille, qui, pour ne rien dépenser, s\'en tenait à la nourriture de la maison, si répugnante qu\'elle fût.
FRENCH   En tête marchait Marguerite, tirant la chaise comme une petite voiture, s\'ouvrant un chemin avec lenteur.
FRENCH    Et elle se hâta de rentrer à son comptoir.
FRENCH   Les commandes de l\'Europe entière affluaient, il fallait une voiture des Postes spéciale pour apporter la correspondance; et elle disait non, toujours non.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle, huit jours plus tard, se contenta de congédier, sous un prétexte, la vendeuse coupable de s\'être laissé embrasser.
ENGLISH       CHAPTER V.
ENGLISH    \"What! you\'ve got a leg as well, Mignot?\" said Favier, as he took his place at one of the tables opposite his companion.
ENGLISH   Perhaps, thought she, it was Uncle Baudu who had sent him, regretting his rigour; for he continued to pass her without taking any notice of her, although he was well aware of her miserable position.
FRENCH   Sa vieille expérience se réjouissait.
FRENCH   Hier, comme je passais rue Neuve- Saint-Augustin, Quinette se trouvait sur sa porte, l\'air si triste, que je n\'ai pas voulu lui demander si les affaires allaient bien.
ENGLISH   The young girl, with a busy look, as if she were running from pay-desk to pay-desk in search of something, reached the stairs and went down into the hall.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, par un instinct d\'homme sage, il s\'était incliné devant lui, obéissant, et cela sans lutte, dès le commencement.
ENGLISH   The salesmen, deafened and exhausted, were now nothing but their slaves, of whom they disposed with sovereign tyranny.
FRENCH   Oui, c\'est ma faute, si notre pauvre fille est là-haut, dévorée de fièvre.
ENGLISH   The small traders of the adjacent streets were receiving another mortal blow.
ENGLISH   Beer and coffee were in great demand.
ENGLISH   We\'ll go into the matter seriously, and I hope to make them listen to reason.
FRENCH    C\'était l\'exposition des ombrelles.
FRENCH   Il devait l\'interroger.
ENGLISH    Denise had now decided to return to The Ladies\' Paradise, having understood that the Robineaus, obliged to cut down their staff, were at a loss how to dismiss her.
FRENCH   je veux...
ENGLISH   \"He hasn\'t any eyes as yet; we must make his eyes now.\" And whilst carving the eyes he continued talking to Denise.
ENGLISH   Wait a bit; I\'m better, I\'m not crying now.\"  Nevertheless sudden attacks kept on seizing her, sending shudders through her frail body.
FRENCH    Mais elle l\'interrompit avec indignation.
FRENCH    -- Mademoiselle, on vous demande à la direction.
FRENCH   Elle le consolait, et dans leur effusion amicale, ils apprirent qu\'ils étaient du même pays, elle de Valognes, lui de Briquebec, à treize kilomètres.
ENGLISH   The mosaics and faiences of the friezes glittered, the green and red paint reflected the fire of the lavish gilding.
FRENCH   À droite, à gauche, les façades, d\'une blancheur crue encore, s\'allongeaient, faisaient retour sur les rues Monsigny et de la Michodière, occupaient toute l\'île sauf le côté de la rue du Dix-Décembre, où le Crédit Immobilier allait bâtir.
ENGLISH   The business was in as bad a way as his betrothed, so the moment was a propitious one for breaking with them both.
FRENCH    Du coup, Mouret se fâcha.
FRENCH   N\'avait-elle pas trop souffert déjà des commérages de la maison? Voulait-il donc qu\'elle passât aux yeux des autres et à ses propres yeux pour une gueuse? Non, non, elle aurait de la force, elle l\'empêcherait bien de faire une telle sottise.
ENGLISH   It would be impossible to prevent things from going on as they ought to, when everybody was working towards that result, whether they liked it or not.
ENGLISH   Hereafter she would most certainly repulse him, and send him back to this woman who did not conceal her affection even before strangers.
ENGLISH   What should she say if he woke up and asked her for bread? And yet had she chosen her misery would have ceased, she could have had money, dresses, and a fine room.
ENGLISH    Just as the cashier was going away, heart-broken at the governor\'s indifference, Bourdoncle arrived, gaily exclaiming: \"Ah! we\'ve got it this time.
FRENCH   Blanche, allons-nous-en, nous serions broyées.
ENGLISH   \"I can\'t think what they get up to together.
ENGLISH   The customers, said he, ought to feel their eyes aching by the time they left the shop.
ENGLISH   The frieze above the ground-floor was formed of a series of mosaics, a garland of red and blue flowers, alternating with marble slabs on which was cut an infinity of names of goods, encircling the colossus.
ENGLISH   As for Pépé, he would be well looked after by Madame Gras, an old lady who rented a large ground floor in the Rue des Orties, where she boarded and lodged young children for forty francs a month.
ENGLISH   They gave thirty sous a head per day to the chief cook, who had to pay for everything, provisions, coal, gas, and staff, and they displayed a naive astonishment when the food was not good.
ENGLISH   Gaujean, who was finishing the pot of jam, explained what enormous sacrifices he and his colleagues would be obliged to make to deliver an article of such quality at so low a price; but they would ruin themselves rather than yield; they had sworn to kill the big shops.
FRENCH   Elle m\'a bousculée à la porte, mais j\'avais déjà mis le pied dans le salon.
FRENCH   Seule, une sorte de peur religieuse, la religion de la chance, l\'avait empêché jusque-là de donner son coup de mâchoire.
ENGLISH   At the further end two ladies were seated before a mauve silk _transparent_, on which Deloche was placing some pieces of Chantilly, the ladies meantime looking on in silence and without making up their minds.
FRENCH    -- Idem, vingt-cinq mètres! lança Hutin.
ENGLISH   She had been looking at Denise for a moment and remembered what she had suffered herself during the first few months after her arrival in the establishment.
ENGLISH   But Bourdoncle in his frigid way obstinately repeated: \"They will have their revenge; there will be one who will some day avenge all the others.
FRENCH   Seulement, vous devez vous rappeler, la fois qu\'elle était en deuil...
FRENCH   Aussi, dans le brusque silence, les oreilles se tendirent, on écouta des voix qui sortaient de la salle voisine, où Mouret et Bourdoncle venaient d\'entrer.
ENGLISH    Why did she still refuse with such obstinacy? Twenty times had he entreated her, increasing his offers, offering money and more money.
FRENCH   Ils ont une manière de vous regarder et de vous parler, là-dedans!...
ENGLISH   These fits got worse, growing daily, sweeping away all the reasonings of prudence; and the enjoyment she felt in the indulgence of them was the more violent from the fact that she was risking before the eyes of a crowd her name, her pride, and her husband\'s high position.
ENGLISH   At the door some red flannels were flapping like so many flags, and a display of carpets blazed forth in a gory efflorescence of huge roses and full-blown peonies.
FRENCH   Je ne sais ce qu\'ils fricotent ensemble.
ENGLISH   \"I promised my husband to go and see his sister at Montmartre.
FRENCH   Enfin, il en serait quitte pour lui dire un mot d\'adieu.
FRENCH   C\'était ensuite une voilette en chantilly: un peu chère, cinquante francs; si elle ne la portait pas, elle en ferait quelque chose pour sa fille.
FRENCH   Comment fait-il pour jouer du cor?  Il n\'avait pas quitté Lhomme des yeux.
FRENCH   Mais cela s\'échaufferait.
ENGLISH   I simply express my opinion.
ENGLISH   The scar left on its flank by the demolition of Bourras\'s hovel had already been so skilfully cicatrized that it would now have been impossible to find the former place of that old wart.
FRENCH   Son père à lui, petit huissier nécessiteux, d\'une jalousie maladive, le rossait en le traitant de bâtard, exaspéré de sa longue figure blême et de ses cheveux de chanvre, qui, disait-il, n\'étaient pas dans la famille.
FRENCH   Et Henriette s\'abandonna brusquement sur une chaise, tordant son mouchoir entre ses doigts fébriles, répétant au milieu de ses sanglots:  -- Mon Dieu! que je suis malheureuse!  Il la regarda quelques secondes, immobile.
ENGLISH   Afterwards came the establishment of a recreation room for the men, with two billiard tables and backgammon and chess boards.
FRENCH   La caisse communiquait avec une autre pièce, meublée de cartons verts, où dix employés vérifiaient les factures.
ENGLISH   \"By all that\'s sacred, it\'s really true this time,\" said he.
FRENCH   En voilà une, au moins, qui mettait le pied sur la gorge du patron, et qui les vengeait tous, et qui savait tirer de lui autre chose que des promesses! Elle était donc venue, celle qui faisait respecter un peu les pauvres diables! Lorsqu\'elle traversait les comptoirs, avec sa tête fine et obstinée, son air tendre et invincible, les vendeurs lui souriaient, étaient fiers d\'elle, l\'auraient volontiers montrée à la foule.
FRENCH   Elle piétinait, allait regarder les couteaux mécaniques, furieuse que son mari n\'inventât pas une histoire pour l\'appeler; mais il n\'était jamais aux affaires sérieuses, il serait mort de soif à côté d\'une mare.
ENGLISH   Then at the far end of the passage there was a sudden halt, before a wicket.
FRENCH   Enfin, Baugé paya, les deux femmes sortirent.
ENGLISH   Have you any _foulard_ for morning gowns?\"  She hoped to obtain the name of the young lady from him, for she was full of a desire to see her.
FRENCH   Puis, comme l\'autre se permit d\'insister, il éclata.
ENGLISH   He had long wanted to write to her and tell her so; but perhaps she would never have known it had it not been for that lovely night coming to his assistance, that water which murmured so softly, and those trees which screened them with their shade.
ENGLISH    \"Well! my dear baron,\" he asked in conclusion, \"will you join me? Does this affair appear possible to you?\"  Albeit half conquered, the baron did not wish to enter into any engagement yet.
ENGLISH    Meantime Bourdoncle had taken up one of the pieces of silk, and was examining the texture with the eye of a connoisseur.
FRENCH    1.F.
ENGLISH   The young ladies\' bed-rooms now occupied the entire fifth storey of the new buildings in the Rue Monsigny; there were sixty of them, on either side of a corridor, and they were much more comfortable than formerly, although still furnished simply with an iron bedstead, large wardrobe, and little mahogany toilet-table.
FRENCH   Elle voulait s\'y présenter, avant de conduire Jean chez son patron, qui demeurait loin, dans le haut du faubourg du Temple.
ENGLISH   However, Madame Marty had closed the bag, as if to conceal certain things she must not show.
ENGLISH   Geneviève ought to have a little more sense, and wait patiently for a better balance.
FRENCH    -- C\'est bon, dit-il enfin, je parlerai à Colomban.
FRENCH   D\'abord, il ne voyait plus Clara.
FRENCH    Et, comme Denise regardait avec surprise l\'angle du plafond, au- dessus du lit, où une dame de passage avait écrit son nom: Ernestine, en promenant la flamme d\'une chandelle, il ajouta d\'un air bonhomme:  -- Si l\'on réparait, on ne joindrait jamais les deux bouts...
ENGLISH   Mouret followed the glance with a start, for he thought he could hear his dead wife pronounce that phrase, one of her own sayings which he recognised.
ENGLISH   I must discover their secret.\"  And thereupon she reverted to her long-meditated plan, mentioning in her agitation that she had requested Madame Aurélie to send her Denise to look at a mantle which fitted badly.
ENGLISH   A man then started off to the police-station for a stretcher, and Denise had the happy thought of going on in front so as to prepare Madame Robineau for this frightful blow.
ENGLISH   With trembling hands, and a choking sensation in her throat, she suddenly ceased to eat.
FRENCH   C\'est la raison, n\'est-ce pas? Vous m\'aviez prévenu, je devrais le savoir et ne pas vous tourmenter davantage.
FRENCH   D\'abord, elle commençait à s\'inquiéter de la pâleur de Jean; et, quand elle eut compris qu\'il s\'agissait d\'une nouvelle histoire de femme, elle voulut le faire taire, en lui ouvrant sa bourse; mais il secouait la tête, il refusait, c\'était sérieux cette fois, la nièce d\'un pâtissier très riche, qui n\'acceptait pas même des bouquets de violettes.
FRENCH   Puisqu\'il avait promis sa fille et la boutique, la stricte probité le forçait à donner les deux en bon état, sans tares ni dettes.
ENGLISH    Then, in a few sentences he explained matters to his wife and daughter.
ENGLISH   \"And try to be cheerful, she mustn\'t know.\"  He himself as he went upstairs rubbed his eyes, in order to remove the traces of his tears.
FRENCH    -- S\'il pouvait les écraser tous! murmura Bourras d\'une voix sauvage.
ENGLISH   \"We have them in several colours.\"  She laid out four or five cloaks.
ENGLISH   Then Madame Aurélie herself was called; and came down bearing the affront with head erect, her fat puffy countenance having the appearance of a wax mask.
FRENCH   On allait la renvoyer sans doute, les enfants seraient sans pain.
ENGLISH   Perhaps he doesn\'t want to kill any one.
FRENCH   L\'avait-elle aimé? L\'aimait-elle toujours? elle ne voulait point remuer ces choses, qui lui étaient pénibles.
FRENCH   Comment! parce qu\'on n\'aimera plus un monsieur, il lui sera permis de vous trancher la gorge! Ah! non, par exemple! Et, s\'interrompant, se tournant vers le garçon de service:  -- Pierre, je ne puis pas avaler le boeuf, vous savez...
FRENCH    -- C\'est vrai, nous causions, monsieur Jouve, balbutia-t-elle, mais il n\'y a pas grand mal à causer un peu...
ENGLISH   He excited his employees\' passions, pitted one against the other, allowed the stronger to swallow up the weaker ones, and for his own part battened on this struggle of conflicting interests.
FRENCH   La chanson du blanc s\'envolait dans la blancheur enflammée d\'une aurore.
FRENCH   Elle accepta avec majesté le bras de son gendre, et comme Mouret la saluait d\'un air galamment respectueux, il l\'entendit qui disait:  -- Ils m\'ont fait des excuses.
FRENCH    -- Pardonne-moi, j\'ai dû être fou...
FRENCH    -- Ainsi, je suis bien certain que des gens à elle vont nous enlever notre Paris-Bonheur.
FRENCH    -- Ah! les misérables, gronda Bourras, ils ne veulent même pas qu\'on l\'emporte!  Le corbillard, qui arrivait enfin, venait d\'être accroché par une voiture du Bonheur, dont les panneaux vernis filaient, jetant dans la brume leur rayonnement d\'astre, au trot rapide de deux chevaux superbes.
ENGLISH   In the centre, for the sake of effect, for the proper season had not yet arrived, there was a display of confirmation costumes, white muslin dresses and veils and white satin shoes, a light gushing florescence like an enormous bouquet of innocence and candid delight.
ENGLISH   It was all over; and so he simply added in an icy tone that he would detain her no longer, since she could not tell him the real cause of her departure.
FRENCH    -- Comment! c\'est vous!  -- Oui, c\'est moi, un peu bousculée seulement.
ENGLISH   And again, at the present time, why did they ascribe her resolution to quit The Ladies\' Paradise to craftiness? It was after all so natural! She had begun to experience a nervous uneasiness, an intolerable anguish, amidst the continual gossip which went on in the house, and Mouret\'s feverish pursuit of her, and the combats she was obliged to wage against herself; and she preferred to go away, seized with fear lest she might some day yield and regret it for ever afterwards.
ENGLISH   Hardly a week passed that she did not receive some fresh story from him, four pages long; and when the house postman brought her these letters, in a big, passionate handwriting, she hastened to hide them in her pocket, for the saleswomen affected to laugh, and hummed snatches of some doubtful ditties.
ENGLISH   The phrase had escaped him against his will in an explosion of long pent-up rancour.
FRENCH    -- De la dentelle, comme ça, dans sa manche, continuait-elle à balbutier.
FRENCH   Mais ce qui l\'étranglait surtout, c\'était d\'apprendre qu\'elle passait les nuits.
FRENCH   Mouret tolère une pareille insolence...
ENGLISH   And she, whilst he was lecturing her, having suddenly perceived the portrait of Madame Hédouin, whose handsome regular face was smiling gravely in its gold frame--felt herself shivering again, despite the encouraging words he addressed to her.
FRENCH    1.E.7.
FRENCH   Geneviève avait reparu, dans son silence et son effacement habituels.
ENGLISH   Then she hastened to cross the hall but a sort of instinct prompted her to raise her head, whilst an inspector was opening the door, closed since the morning.
FRENCH   Depuis qu\'elle écrivait d\'une main machinale, au milieu de l\'appel régulier des articles, un apaisement se faisait en elle.
FRENCH   Mme Desforges reprit, debout devant Hutin:  -- Veuillez nous conduire aux confections.
FRENCH    Il s\'interrompit, pour partager de nouveau, avec une parcimonie pleine de justice, un plat de pommes de terre au lard, que la bonne apportait.
FRENCH   J\'achète mon lacet et je me sauve.
FRENCH    -- Bonsoir, ma cousine, reprit Denise, en baisant la première Geneviève sur les joues.
ENGLISH    Bourdoncle, the son of a poor farmer near Limoges, had begun his career at The Ladies\' Paradise at the same time as Mouret, when it only occupied the corner of the Place Gaillon.
FRENCH   Seulement, je vous préviens que je vais envoyer chercher le commissaire de police.
FRENCH   Étiez-vous bien placé?  Une rougeur monta aux joues blanches du vieux caissier.
FRENCH    Alors, il y eut une scène affreuse.
ENGLISH   Clara alone risked a strong remark in the ear of Mademoiselle de Fontenailles, but the latter\'s face remained expressionless.
FRENCH   Sa misère finissait, elle avait de l\'argent, des robes, une belle chambre.
FRENCH   Vraiment, Jean ne songeait guère au petit, lorsqu\'il faisait des sottises.
FRENCH   Il abominait ces jours de grosse vente, qui lui cassaient les bras, et il tâchait d\'esquiver la besogne, largement entretenu par son père, se moquant de vendre, en faisait tout juste assez pour ne pas être mis à la porte.
FRENCH   Et dites-leur que je gagnerai mon procès, quand je devrais y manger ma dernière chemise!  Denise ne devait quitter Robineau qu\'à la fin du mois.
ENGLISH   \"Pray be more careful, Mademoiselle Prunaire; it\'s altogether intolerable.\"  But a hum ran along: Mouret and Bourdoncle, making their round of inspection, had just appeared.
ENGLISH   She had forgotten him.
ENGLISH   The other salesmen of the department were occupied in piling up pieces of the Paris Delight under Robineau\'s orders; whilst Bouthemont, in full consultation with a thin young woman, seemed to be taking an important order.
FRENCH    -- En voilà qui ont du monde, au moins, laissa-t-elle échapper.
ENGLISH    \"Well, if I were you I should buy the mantle ready-made,\" said Madame Desforges, suddenly returning to the Paris Delight.
ENGLISH   \"But it\'s ridiculous.
ENGLISH   The charwoman only came in the morning and evening to do a little cooking, and help him take down and put up the shutters.
FRENCH   Cette fois, la jolie dame était en grand deuil.
FRENCH    Et, comme on s\'étonnait:  -- Puisque je l\'ai vue hier soir qui promenait le mioche!...
ENGLISH   Favier thereupon leant over the wicket and called out--\"Chicken!\"  But he had to wait; one of the kitchen helps had cut his finger in carving, and this caused some confusion.
FRENCH   Voilà ce dont le quartier se plaint, car les petites boutiques commencent à y souffrir terriblement.
ENGLISH   Towards the Opera-house and the Bourse were rows of waiting vehicles, the harness of the horses still presenting reflections of bright light, the gleam of a lamp, the glitter of a silver chain.
FRENCH   M.
ENGLISH   But in spite of their revolt, the title of second-hand influenced them, and Denise with her promotion assumed a certain air of authority which astonished and overawed even the most hostile spirits.
ENGLISH   \"There\'s one whom they\'ll never get hold of! Ah! my boy, you\'re the last of the old stock, we shan\'t see any more!\"  But Geneviève, with her severe and suffering look, did not take her eyes off Colomban, but dived into the depths of his heart.
FRENCH   L\'argent est bête, si on ne le dépense pas.
FRENCH   Cela restait paternel, et il ne lâchait le taureau que dehors, lorsqu\'on voulait bien accepter des tartines de beurre, chez lui, rue des Moineaux.
ENGLISH   Ah! my boy, don\'t you laugh, the hours that make one die of grief are by far the shortest!\" Then he lowered his voice and continued gaily, beneath his half-dried tears: \"Yes, you know all, don\'t you? Between them they have rent my heart.
FRENCH   Oh! pour moi, je vous le répète, je m\'en moque, car elle a fini par m\'agacer.
FRENCH    -- Possible, répéta Hutin, à moins que ce ne soit un amant qui l\'ait plantée là.
ENGLISH   Business was getting so bad that Colomban sufficed; and even he spent many idle hours, drowsy, falling asleep with his eyes open.
ENGLISH   At last, he observed, without raising his head: \"One must have proofs, try and bring me some proofs.
ENGLISH    \"Then,\" continued Pauline, \"you\'ll never manage, I tell you so, plainly.
ENGLISH   In the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin and on the Place Gaillon, where the vehicles were to take their stand, there were at nine o\'clock only two cabs.
FRENCH   Ma chère, vous lui avez rentré ça dans la gorge...
FRENCH   Bête comme une oie, mais si drôle!  Il prit un autre paquet de traites et continua de signer.
ENGLISH    \"Now,\" continued Baudu, \"a sum of money has come in that may save us.
FRENCH    -- Non, merci, je m\'ennuierais à ne rien faire...
ENGLISH    \"This way, my dear baron,\" said Madame Desforges.
ENGLISH   But how puny, how common-place she was!  \"I will show you some other patterns, madame,\" said Denise, quietly.
ENGLISH   \"No, sir, I cannot.
FRENCH    -- Oh! j\'irai bien jusque-là, je me sens beaucoup mieux depuis ce matin.
FRENCH   Privé de son bras droit, coupé au coude, il les serrait son bras gauche contre sa poitrine, il en maintenait un avec son menton, pour l\'empêcher de glisser.
ENGLISH   And this torment rendered him terrible; he made the whole house tremble.
FRENCH   C\'était à la rencontrer l\'air triste, vêtue pauvrement, que le coeur de Joseph, de tempérament tendre sous sa raideur muette d\'ancien soldat, avait fini par être touché.
ENGLISH   They\'ve ruined our business, and now one of their hussies is killing our daughter.\"  No one spoke.
ENGLISH    It had struck eleven some ten minutes previously when a sound of footsteps made Denise raise her head.
ENGLISH   Confined to her room since the previous Thursday through having sprained her ankle whilst on her way up to the work-rooms, she was now much better; but, as Madame Aurélie treated her indulgently, she did not hurry down.
ENGLISH   She stood there, motionless, waiting for the end of this fit; whilst Pépé, very tired, fell asleep again, this time on a chair.
FRENCH   Veux-tu des promesses, en voilà! Et ils vous nourrissent de vieilles semelles, et ils vous flanquent à la porte comme des chiens!  Le vendeur qui l\'avait déjà questionné, répéta:  -- Vous dites donc que votre Robineau...?  Mais un tapage de grosse vaisselle couvrit sa voix.
FRENCH    Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
FRENCH   Je vous attends ce soir, ou je prendrai des mesures...
ENGLISH   The young people were to accompany Denise to Valognes: it was to be a regular honeymoon trip, a month\'s holiday which would remind them of old times.
ENGLISH   But he stopped and looked round for Denise, surprised at not seeing her there.
FRENCH   Entre deux morceaux, la voix empâtée, chacun lâchait une phrase, ajoutait un détail; et il n\'y avait que les liseurs obstinés, qui restaient muets, perdus, le nez enfoncé dans un journal.
ENGLISH    At this Mouret\'s passion subsided, and he became affectionate again.
FRENCH   Quant à la monture, chère madame, c\'est un vol abominable.
FRENCH   Mais, ce jour-là, Pauline seule s\'y trouvait couchée, près d\'une des grandes fenêtres, qui ouvraient sur la rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin.
ENGLISH   I just came up to see how you were, and to tell you that we did not require you downstairs.\"  Denise assured her, however, that she felt much better and that it would do her good to have some occupation.
FRENCH   Il les savait incapables de résister au bon marché.
FRENCH   Il tapa de sa main ouverte sur la soie, il cria nerveusement:  -- Mais je le sais, et c\'est pourquoi je désire en faire cadeau à nos clientes...
FRENCH   Tout souriait alors dans son visage blanc, ses yeux de pervenche, ses joues et son menton troués de fossettes; tandis que ses lourds cheveux blonds semblaient s\'éclairer aussi, d\'une beauté royale et conquérante.
FRENCH   Dans sa chambre, la porte fermée, elle s\'abandonna sur le lit, tellement les pieds lui faisaient du mal.
FRENCH   Même il osa lui dire, quand ils furent seuls:  -- Encore celle-là! Méfiez-vous, ça finira par être sérieux!  Vivement, Mouret se défendit, cachant son émotion sous un air d\'insouciance supérieure.
FRENCH    -- Vous entendez, monsieur le baron, toute la mécanique est là.
FRENCH   Debout sur le seuil de sa boutique, l\'oncle regardait d\'un oeil morne.
FRENCH   Puis, le blanc retombait des voûtes, une tombée de duvet, une nappe neigeuse en larges flocons: des couvertures blanches, des couvre- pieds blancs, battaient l\'air, accrochés, pareils à des bannières d\'église; de longs jets de guipure traversaient, semblaient suspendre des essaims de papillons blancs, au bourdonnement immobile; des dentelles frissonnaient de toutes parts, flottaient comme des fils de la Vierge par un soleil d\'été, emplissaient l\'air de leur haleine blanche.
FRENCH    Vallagnosc souriait d\'un air d\'embarras.
FRENCH   Elles se lassent d\'être à vous, et vous êtes à elles, mon cher: juste retour!  Il plaisanta, il était au courant des amours bruyantes du jeune homme.
FRENCH   C\'était l\'histoire de la lettre qui circulait.
FRENCH   Le Bonheur des Dames avait été fondé en 1822 par les frères Deleuze.
ENGLISH   If you think me what you say, I will not remain in the house another second.\"  But he rushed in front of the door, exclaiming: \"Why don\'t you defend yourself? Say something!\"  She stood there very stiff, maintaining an icy silence.
ENGLISH   And, for the future, this façade, before which people were now crowding, became a living advertisement with its motley, gilded magnificence, its windows large enough for the display of the entire poem of woman\'s dress and its profusion of inscriptions painted, engraved and cut in stone, from the marble slabs of the ground-floor to the sheets of iron rounded off in semicircles above the roofs and unfolding gilded streamers on which the name of the house could be read in letters bright as the sun, against the azure blue of the sky.
FRENCH   Alors l\'abandon fut complet, toutes s\'acharnèrent sur «la mal peignée», celle-ci vécut dans une lutte de chaque heure, n\'arrivant avec tout son courage qu\'à se maintenir au rayon, difficilement.
ENGLISH   Confound it! they have shaken it up so much with their infernal machines, that it isn\'t astonishing if it gives way!\"  Then, when the girl announced she was going to leave, and was returning to The Ladies\' Paradise at a salary of a thousand francs, he became so amazed that he could only raise his trembling hands in the air.
FRENCH    -- Si, si, vous avez quelque chose...
ENGLISH   \"This is a fine dance, with all this crockery!\"  The table at which he and Favier sat, was at the end of the corridor, in the last dining-room.
ENGLISH   Another pleasure was in store for them, in the first gallery.
ENGLISH   Had she another situation in view? If so, he was quite prepared to offer her the advantages she expected to obtain elsewhere.
ENGLISH   She could never meet this young man face to face without experiencing a feeling of shame, as if he reminded her of some former fault; and yet she had only sinned in her dreams.
ENGLISH   As for Madame Aurélie, she was hurt by the proud reserve displayed by Denise, who did not hover round her skirts with an air of caressing admiration; and she therefore abandoned her to the rancour of her favourites, the preferred ones of her court, who were always on their knees, feeding her with the continual flattery which could alone impart any amiability to her proud domineering nature.
FRENCH   Veuillez d\'abord rendre les dentelles que vous avez sur vous...
ENGLISH   Then, right at the top, the entablature blossomed forth like an ardent florescence of the entire façade, mosaics and faience reappeared with yet warmer colourings, the zinc of the eaves was cut and gilded, while along the acroteria ran a nation of statues, emblematical of the great industrial and manufacturing cities, their delicate silhouettes profiled against the sky.
FRENCH   Doucement, elle continuait de s\'essayer à marcher, en se promettant de se coucher de bonne heure, afin de reposer sa jambe, lorsque la surveillante, Mme Cabin, frappa et lui donna une lettre, d\'un air de mystère.
FRENCH   Et, sur le pavé, elle reconnut le malheureux, évanoui, la redingote souillée de boue.
ENGLISH   That would be the climax--to see them come between me and my family! Go back with them, if you like; but pray don\'t worry me with any more of their stories!\"  A silence ensued.
FRENCH   Puis, elle releva la tête avec peine, elle regarda le visage compatissant, penché vers le sien.
FRENCH    Clara se résigna, domptée.
ENGLISH   Then came yet a third office, the clearing-house, so to say, where six young men bending over black desks, with quite a collection of registers behind them, made up the commission accounts of the salesmen, by checking the debit notes.
FRENCH   Clara était chargée de veiller aux tas, de les ranger et de les échafauder, de manière à ce qu\'ils tinssent le moins de place possible, le long des tables.
FRENCH    Jean et Pépé, qui attendaient, souriants au milieu de ce flot débordé de femmes, se remirent à suivre leur soeur.
FRENCH    Mais, de l\'autre côté de la chaussée, le Bonheur des Dames allumait les files profondes de ses becs de gaz.
FRENCH    Au moment où le caissier se retirait, navré de l\'indifférence du patron, Bourdoncle arriva, en criant gaiement:  -- Hein! nous le tenons, cette fois!...
ENGLISH    \"Well?\" asked Pauline of Denise, taking her aside when they reached the station.
FRENCH   Autour d\'elles, d\'abord, il y avait le vestibule, un hall aux glaces claires, pavé de mosaïques, où les étalages à bas prix retenaient la foule vorace.
FRENCH   Allons, du courage! donnez-moi la main, nous causerons gentiment, quand vous voudrez.
ENGLISH   Denise\'s confusion had increased; but her heart was full of joy.
ENGLISH   The second-hand, Madame Frédéric, who, with the sulky harshness of widowhood, delighted in prophesying disasters, declared curtly that the day was lost, that they would not see a soul, that they might close the cupboards and go away; predictions which clouded the flat face of Marguerite who was eager to make money, whilst Clara, with her runaway-horse appearance, already began dreaming of an excursion to the woods of Verrières should the house really fail.
FRENCH   Les vendeuses, enchantées d\'avoir mis aux prises la première et la seconde du rayon, étaient retournées à leur besogne, d\'un air de profonde indifférence.
ENGLISH   But even this was only gratitude in her eyes; she simply thought herself touched by the young man\'s politeness.
FRENCH   Eh quoi! même à ce prix, elle se refusait encore! Au loin, il entendait la clameur de ses trois mille employés, remuant à pleins bras sa royale fortune.
ENGLISH   The one had violently taken off the mantle and cast it on a chair, whilst the other was throwing on the dressing-table the few pins still remaining in her hands.
ENGLISH   They talked of it, promising themselves some of it, all agog with desire and doubt.
ENGLISH    \"What a blackguard!\" he had shouted.
FRENCH   Jamais elle ne l\'aurait acceptée, à cause du tracas; mais elle était vexée du manque de politesse, car elle avait les mêmes titres que l\'autre, et des titres antérieurs.
FRENCH   Et la catastrophe venait d\'être si brusque, on l\'avait poussée dehors si rudement, qu\'elle retournait au fond de sa poche ses vingt-cinq francs soixante-dix, d\'une main machinale, en se demandant où aller et que faire.
ENGLISH    And he even went with her a little way, as far indeed as the foot of the staircase on the left-hand side of the hall.
FRENCH   Elle était secrètement pour les grands magasins, dans son amour instinctif de la logique et de la vie.
FRENCH   Elle se sentait perdue, toute petite dans le monstre, dans la machine encore au repos, tremblant d\'être prise par le branle dont les murs frémissaient déjà.
ENGLISH   Some salesmen were standing about listlessly, and a few rare customers crossed the galleries and the hall, with the indolent step of women annoyed by the sun.
FRENCH    -- Qui? Mme Cabin? dit Pauline.
ENGLISH   She has never been very strong herself, and has often said to me: \'My poor child, you\'re like myself, by no means strong.
FRENCH   Cependant, Denise s\'approcha, attirée par la pitié active, qui la faisait se mêler de tous les accidents, des chiens écrasés, des chevaux abattus, des couvreurs tombés des toits.
ENGLISH   But on the following morning he again appeared on the opposite side of the street, after passing the night in a lodging-house of the neighbourhood.
ENGLISH    \"I beg your pardon, mademoiselle,\" he finished by stammering, \"but perhaps you belong to the establishment?\"  She was so troubled at hearing a stranger address her that she did not at first reply.
FRENCH    Ce furent d\'abord deux mois de terrible gêne.
ENGLISH   During her husband\'s lifetime she had already known Baron Hartmann, whose financial tips had proved very useful to them; and later on, after her husband\'s death, the connection had been kept up in a discreet fashion; for she never courted notoriety in any way, and was received everywhere in the upper-middle class to which she belonged.
ENGLISH   She soon recognised it, with its two low storeys, and rusty-coloured front, squeezed between The Ladies\' Paradise and the old Hôtel Duvillard.
FRENCH   Sans exiger des filles belles, on les voulait agréables, pour la vente.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle et M.
ENGLISH   Still on seeing the idle cashiers leaning back on their chairs behind their wickets, and observing that the parcel-tables with their boxes of string and reams of blue packing-paper remained unlittered, Mouret, though indignant with himself for being afraid, thought he could feel his immense machine ceasing to work and turning cold beneath him.
FRENCH    Et il la poursuivait de ce mot, tandis qu\'elle remontait au magasin, la gorge serrée d\'émotion, sans trouver une parole de défense.
ENGLISH   Good heavens! how she loved him, and with what delight she could have hung on his neck and remained there!  But in his passionate excitement he grew brutal.
ENGLISH    Denise, however, had risen.
ENGLISH   It\'s rather funny, all the same.\"  At first Denise and Deloche remained silent.
FRENCH   Non, jamais un tel calcul n\'est entré dans ma tête, et vous savez que j\'ai horreur du mensonge!  -- Dame! ma chère, reprit doucement Pauline, vous aurez l\'idée de vous faire épouser, que vous ne vous y prendriez pas autrement...
FRENCH   Quant à Marguerite, elle allait enfin retourner prendre la direction du petit magasin de Grenoble, où son cousin l\'attendait.
ENGLISH   Below, in boxes and on tables, amidst piles of remnants, appeared a quantity of hosiery which was virtually given away; knitted woollen gloves, neckerchiefs, women\'s hoods, cardigan waistcoats, a complete winter show with colours in mixtures, patterns and stripes and here and there a flaming patch of red.
FRENCH   Chaque fois que le Bonheur des Dames créait des rayons nouveaux, c\'étaient de nouveaux écroulements, chez les boutiquiers des alentours.
ENGLISH    Suddenly there was a knock and she hastened to pick up the missive and conceal it in her pocket.
ENGLISH   But above all else, what most deafened you was the sound of the machinery.
ENGLISH   Favier, it turned out, had made fifteen francs while Hutin had only managed to make thirteen; he had been thoroughly beaten that day, and was enraged at his bad luck.
ENGLISH   What was she saying, and what did she want? The other girls had never asked to be loved.
ENGLISH    The latter gave her opinion, like a supreme umpire of fashion.
FRENCH   À la caisse, Mme Baudu et Geneviève se tenaient muettes et immobiles, comme dans un coin de solitude, où personne ne venait les déranger.
FRENCH   Le comptoir espérait qu\'il ne rentrerait pas, dégoûté des ennuis qu\'on lui créait sans cesse; et, un moment, en effet, toujours pressé par Vinçard, qui voulait lui céder son fonds de commerce, il avait failli le prendre.
ENGLISH    \"My stars!\" said the driver, whipping up his horses, \"I\'ve done a famous day\'s work.\"  Denise followed Robineau into the chemist\'s.
FRENCH    Et, si le chef de comptoir hésitait, ne sachant lesquels sacrifier:  -- Arrangez-vous, six vendeurs doivent vous suffire...
FRENCH   Mais j\'en ai pour la matinée à compter.
ENGLISH    \"Why?\" declared Mouret, when he could at last speak, \"one can sell what one likes when one knows how to sell! Therein lies our triumph.\"  And then with his southern enthusiasm, he pictured the new business at work in warm, glowing phrases which brought everything vividly before the eyes.
ENGLISH    \"There!\" exclaimed Mouret, when he had finished.
ENGLISH    \"Put a pin here! No! not there, here, near the sleeve.
ENGLISH   \"Well! I can take a couple, that won\'t ruin us.\"  Madame de Boves, however, disdained this style of thing; she detested to have things offered to her.
FRENCH    -- Ma pauvre fille, répondit-elle, si je n\'avais pas d\'autres peines, tu me verrais plus gaie.
FRENCH    Vivement, il lui mit sur le bras les articles de Mme Marty, qu\'il était las de promener.
FRENCH   Ils étaient à table l\'un près de l\'autre; mais ils y restaient bien tranquilles, sans une rougeur, sans un sourire.
FRENCH   N\'était-ce pas toujours devant elle qu\'il revenait travailler, après ses échappées de jeune veuf, au sortir des alcôves où le besoin du plaisir l\'égarait?  On frappa, et, sans attendre, un jeune homme entra, grand et maigre, aux lèvres minces, au nez pointu, très correct d\'ailleurs avec ses cheveux lissés, où des mèches grises se montraient déjà.
FRENCH   Un matin, dans le cabinet, avant le conseil, Bourdoncle osa lui faire entendre que cette petite fille des confections se moquait de lui.
FRENCH    D\'autres craintes la tenaient éveillée.
FRENCH   Je suis brisé, je n\'en peux plus; n\'importe, tu ne saurais croire combien j\'aime la vie!...
FRENCH    -- Vous avez donc fait le tour? demanda Pauline, assise déjà et se coupant du pain.
ENGLISH   It was a medley of ladies arrayed in silk, of poorly dressed middle-class women, and of bare-headed girls, all excited and carried away by the same passion.
FRENCH   En bas, la jeune fille trouva la rue pleine de monde.
FRENCH   Sans doute elle avait deviné les tortures jalouses de Geneviève; mais elle n\'osa les confier à son mari.
ENGLISH   At that moment, Bourdoncle, seeking Mouret, was waiting for him outside, having been stopped before the closed door by Jouve, who had whispered a word in his ear with a grave air.
FRENCH    Personne ne parla plus.
FRENCH   Dans sa détresse, elle dit tout à voix basse.
ENGLISH   Here is a certificate.\"  It was excellent.
FRENCH   À moins qu\'elle n\'ait gagné de l\'argent à la Bourse.
FRENCH    Et, comme celle-là ne s\'arrêtait pas davantage, il ajouta entre ses dents, de manière à ne pouvoir être entendu:  -- Tas de guenons!  Lui, surtout, ne les aimait guère, les jambes cassées de monter l\'escalier pour leur amener des acheteuses, furieux du gain qu\'il les accusait de lui prendre ainsi dans la poche.
ENGLISH   That will be my happiness.\"  He could say no more.
ENGLISH    The next day Denise was appointed first-hand.
FRENCH   Ils n\'avaient pas dit un mot.
ENGLISH   Two of them had fallen ill, and Madame Frédéric, the second-hand, had quietly given notice the previous day, and repaired to the cashier\'s office to take her money, leaving The Ladies\' Paradise at a minute\'s notice, just as The Ladies\' Paradise itself discharged its employees.
ENGLISH    Denise was quietly listening.
FRENCH   Denise, gênée, avait jeté un coup d\'oeil sur la boutique.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle, de nouveau, céda.
ENGLISH    The busy morning crowd barely glanced at the windows, as it passed without slackening its steps.
ENGLISH   It was four o\'clock, the rays of the setting sun were darting obliquely through the large front windows and throwing a cross light on the glazed roofs of the halls; and in this red, fiery glow arose, like a golden vapour, the thick dust raised by the circulation of the crowd since early morning.
FRENCH   Et son mari, ah! bien, il se fiche joliment de quinze francs! Pour un million, il n\'autoriserait pas sa femme.
FRENCH   Vous savez qu\'il a toujours été nerveux, l\'esprit tourmenté.
ENGLISH   \"We shall all of us be crushed under them.\"     CHAPTER VIII.
ENGLISH   He had already introduced two velvet-padded lifts, in order to spare delicate ladies the trouble of climbing the stairs to the upper floors.
ENGLISH   Mouret, still standing in the midst of the ladies, had recovered his elegant gracefulness; he was gaily defending himself from the charge of ruining them in dress and offering to prove by figures that he enabled them to save thirty per cent on their purchases.
ENGLISH    \"Here you are, then!\" said Madame Desforges, on finding Madame Bourdelais installed before a counter.
FRENCH   On ne se gênait plus devant elles, on causait des affaires, à table, dans l\'arrière-boutique, qui donnait sur une grande cour.
FRENCH   Après? le beau malheur, si nous attirons toutes les femmes et si nous les tenons à notre merci, séduites, affolées devant l\'entassement de nos marchandises, vidant leur porte-monnaie sans compter! Le tout, mon cher, est de les allumer, et il faut pour cela un article qui flatte, qui fasse époque.
FRENCH   Où demeurez-vous?  -- Chez mon oncle, murmura-t-elle, hésitant à le nommer, craignant qu\'on ne voulût jamais de la nièce d\'un concurrent.
ENGLISH   The procession had just turned into the Rue de la Chaussée d\'Antin, where it was stopped by a block of vehicles.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! precisely, here\'s Robineau,\" said Bouthemont.
ENGLISH   But all at once he protested violently, believing as he did in the all-powerfulness of his will.
ENGLISH   She had noticed the scene, and spoke in a low tone, smiling.
ENGLISH   \"We must search you.\"  Still she did not yield, but with superb assurance, declared: \"Very good, search me.
ENGLISH   It contained twenty-two places.
FRENCH   Jean était allé sur le seuil de la boutique et n\'en bougeait plus, intéressé par la vie des trottoirs, souriant aux jolies filles qui passaient.
FRENCH    Baudu se retint, soulevé de colère.
ENGLISH   Moreover, she could not avoid certain meetings.
FRENCH    Cependant, les mains toujours liées, ils passèrent en plaisantant dans le petit salon, au moment où le domestique apportait le thé, un service de Chine sur un plateau d\'argent, qu\'il posa près de Mme Desforges, au milieu du guéridon de marbre, à légère galerie de cuivre.
ENGLISH   They took off the rotten slates, the ceilings fell in and the walls cracked, and yet he remained there, under the bare old beams, amidst the ruins.
FRENCH   N\'êtes-vous pas satisfaite?  Alors, elle rougit.
FRENCH    Alors, avec sa verve provençale, en phrases chaudes qui évoquaient les images, il montra le nouveau commerce à l\'oeuvre.
ENGLISH   Denise was ever in his thoughts.
FRENCH    Pendant qu\'il parlait, Denise examinait Colomban et Geneviève.
ENGLISH   \"He never loved Geneviève, he would have run away sooner if you had tried to hasten the marriage.
FRENCH    Et elle parla de son premier amant, un clerc d\'avoué, qu\'elle avait connu dans une partie, à Meudon.
ENGLISH   No doubt they had duplicated a few, but others were quite new; for instance a furniture department, and a department for fancy goods.
ENGLISH   Uncle Baudu was forgotten.
FRENCH    -- Diable! dit-il dans le corridor de la cuisine, devant le tableau noir où le menu était inscrit, on voit bien que c\'est l\'inventaire.
FRENCH   Seule, au milieu de ce bouleversement, l\'étroite masure du vieux Bourras restait immobile et intacte, obstinément accrochée entre les hautes murailles, couvertes de maçons.
FRENCH    -- Puisque ça m\'est arrivé! répéta Pauline.
ENGLISH   But she suffered still more from the annoyances of the street, the continual persecution of passers-by.
FRENCH   Vous ne savez pas combien vous me faites plaisir, en consentant à vous promener avec moi.
FRENCH   Il était affligé d\'un appétit excessif, qu\'il n\'avait jamais satisfait, et comme il gagnait trop peu pour se payer des suppléments, il se taillait des tranches de pain énormes, il avalait les platées les moins ragoûtantes, d\'un air de gourmandise.
ENGLISH   I simply wanted to assure you that every one in our establishment now knows of your affection for your brothers.\" Then he went on speaking with a respectful politeness to which the saleswomen of The Ladies\' Paradise were little accustomed.
FRENCH   N\'était-ce donc pas assez de lui faire manquer une vente, en bas? Voilà qu\'elles l\'attardaient maintenant, à chaque détour du magasin! Et, dans son irritation, il y avait surtout la rancune des rayons de tissus contre les rayons d\'articles confectionnés, en lutte continuelle, se disputant les clientes, se volant leur tant pour cent et leur guelte.
FRENCH    Deloche s\'en alla navré, ayant compris que la jeune fille acceptait la situation et qu\'elle irait, le soir, au rendez-vous.
FRENCH   Une senteur exquise s\'épandait alentour, les dames en passant trempaient leurs mouchoirs.
FRENCH    Le bec de gaz sifflait toujours, dans l\'air étouffé du cabinet.
ENGLISH   That was the dead lady, she whom people accused him of having killed, in order to found the house with the blood of her limbs.
FRENCH   Chez les soyeux, l\'inventaire fonctionnait rondement.
ENGLISH    \"Gentlemen,\" said she at last, \"I leave you to your conversation.\" And, turning towards Paul, who had risen from the sofa, she resumed: \"Will you accept a cup of tea, Monsieur de Vallagnosc?\"  \"With pleasure, madame,\" he replied, and they both returned to the larger drawing-room.
FRENCH   Favier accompagna Mme Boutarel à la mercerie, et quand il reparut, il dit à Hutin:  -- Hier toutes auvergnates, aujourd\'hui toutes provençales...
FRENCH    -- Oh! extraordinaire! répétaient ces dames.
ENGLISH   We won\'t talk about it any more, for it\'s useless to let that part us again.
ENGLISH   She\'s expecting you, she\'s been asking for you all night.
ENGLISH    \"Good evening, aunt,\" said Denise; \"I\'m delighted to see you again, and if I have hurt your feelings, I hope you will forgive me.\"  Madame Baudu kissed her, greatly affected.
ENGLISH   He had never before had such a clear, definite idea of the struggle he was engaged in.
FRENCH   Imaginez-vous, une bêtise: j\'ai parié et j\'ai perdu...
FRENCH   Une houle de têtes, de poings brandis, de membres volants, semblait se perdre au fond des rayons, dans un lointain confus d\'émeute.
ENGLISH   Madame Bourdelais, with her three children, Madeleine, Edmond and Lucien, seated according to their size, was getting angry with the smallest because he continued struggling whilst Denise tried to put a muslin-de-laine jacket on him.
FRENCH   Et ne craignez rien.
ENGLISH   The embellishments that he had made, the light green paint work, the mirrors, the gilded sign, were all cracking, already getting dirty, exhibiting the rapid lamentable decrepitude of false luxury laid over ruins.
FRENCH   Et ne vous inquiétez pas, le médecin affirme que ce ne sera rien.
FRENCH    Elle cherchait un sujet consolant, des paroles gaies, et n\'en trouvait point.
ENGLISH    At this Baudu became dumb.
ENGLISH   And he questioned her, astonished at her bewildered appearance.
ENGLISH   Delighted to lower the young girl to this servant\'s work, she gave her curt orders, watching the while for the least sign of suffering on Mouret\'s face.
ENGLISH   \"I know, I know.
ENGLISH   The Bon Marché holds the left side of the river; the Louvre occupies the centre of the city; we monopolize, at The Paradise, the rich west-end district.
FRENCH   Alors, que disait-on? ce n\'était pas une cocotte, elle avait eu un mari véritable.
FRENCH    Denise n\'avait pas aperçu le commis.
ENGLISH    Then returning to their point of departure, standing near the door, amidst the umbrellas and neckties, Mouret and Bourdoncle received the report of one of the four inspectors, who were charged with the police service of the establishment.
FRENCH   En bas, dans la galerie centrale, après les soldes de la porte, il y avait les cravates, la ganterie, la soie; la galerie Monsigny était occupée par le blanc et la rouennerie, la galerie Michodière par la mercerie, la bonneterie, la draperie et les lainages.
ENGLISH   On reaching his desk, Mouret, who never cared to render himself unpopular by performing police duty, and from policy and taste preferred to play the part of a benign Providence, retired into the back ground, after gently nudging Bourdoncle with his elbow.
FRENCH   Un froid noir tombait du plafond; des heures se passèrent sans qu\'une cliente vînt déranger cette ombre, et les marchandises qu\'on ne remuait pas, étaient de plus en plus gagnées par le salpêtre des murs.
ENGLISH    \"Madame Aurélie, if you please?\"  However Favier, who was disagreeable, contented himself with replying sharply: \"On the first floor.\"  Then, Denise, longing to escape the looks of all these men, thanked him, and was again turning her back to the stairs she ought to have ascended when Hutin, yielding naturally to his instinctive gallantry, stopped her with his most amiable salesman\'s smile albeit he had just spoken of her as a drab.
FRENCH   À Lyon, ils sont furieux contre vous, ils prétendent que vos bons marchés les ruinent...
ENGLISH   But there is such a crowd that I am waiting to get near the department.\"  Then she went on talking, saying how convenient this system of returns was; formerly she had never bought anything, but now she sometimes allowed herself to be tempted.
FRENCH   Des drapeaux flottaient à la porte, des pièces de lainage battaient l\'air frais du matin, animant la place Gaillon d\'un vacarme de fête foraine; tandis que, sur les deux rues, les vitrines développaient des symphonies d\'étalages, dont la netteté des glaces avivait encore les tons éclatants.
ENGLISH   Denise always had a few sweets in her pockets to appease the tears of some youngster in despair at not being able to carry off a pair of red breeches; and she lived there amongst these little ones as in her own family, feeling quite young again herself from the contact of all the innocence and freshness incessantly renewed around her skirts.
FRENCH    -- C\'est du propre, je viens de voir l\'amant de la mal peignée...
ENGLISH   I assure you, my dear, I\'ve been very reasonable; for there was a large lace flounce at five hundred francs, oh! a marvel!\"  \"Why didn\'t you buy it?\" asked Madame Guibal, calmly.
FRENCH    Dans le jour gris qui venait des larges soupiraux, une équipe d\'hommes recevait les envois, tandis que d\'autres déclouaient les caisses et ouvraient les ballots, en présence des chefs de rayon.
FRENCH   Deux fois déjà, ils sont venus pour m\'entortiller.
FRENCH    La vendeuse la regarda sans répondre, d\'un air de dédain pour sa mise pauvre, puis s\'adressant à une de ses camarades, petite, d\'une mauvaise chair blanche, avec une mine innocente et dégoûtée, elle demanda:  -- Mademoiselle Vadon, savez-vous où est la première?  Celle-là, qui était en train de ranger des rotondes par ordre de taille, ne prit même pas la peine de lever la tête.
FRENCH   Marty, à la suite de violentes scènes de ménage, venait d\'être frappé du délire des grandeurs: il puisait à pleines mains dans les trésors de la terre, il vidait les mines d\'or, chargeait des tombereaux de diamants et de pierreries.
ENGLISH   Had she not confessed to him one evening that she loved somebody? From that moment he had been carrying deep in his heart, like the stab of a knife, the confession wrung from her.
FRENCH    -- Votre nom? demanda la première, la plume à la main, prête à écrire sur le bout d\'un comptoir.
ENGLISH   Perhaps others, like herself, stopped up to mend their things, in spite of the regulations; but if so they probably took the same precautions as she did, moving with prudent care, and avoiding the least noise, for a quivering silence prevailed behind the closed doors.
ENGLISH    It was very seldom that he interfered in the engagement of the employees, the manager of each department being responsible for his or her staff.
FRENCH   Ils résistent toujours.
ENGLISH   Under the bright light from the glass roof there appeared an enormous florescence, a white sheaf, tall and broad as an oak.
FRENCH   Depuis un an, la dame tirait de ce dernier l\'argent et le plaisir qu\'elle pouvait, n\'écrivant jamais, lui donnant rendez-vous dans des lieux publics, les églises, les musées, les magasins, pour s\'entendre.
FRENCH   Le pis était leur situation neutre, mal déterminée, entre la boutiquière et la dame.
FRENCH    -- Votre soie, votre Paris-Bonheur, dont tous les journaux parlent? reprit Mme Marty, impatiente.
FRENCH   Non, voyez-vous, c\'est à confondre la raison!  Il branlait la tête, ses yeux vagues s\'étaient baissés et regardaient les dalles humides, usées par des générations de clientes.
FRENCH   Nous allons piocher l\'idée sérieusement, et j\'espère leur faire entendre raison.
ENGLISH   I\'ll see, I\'ll decide later on.\"  Mouret watched her depart.
ENGLISH    \"As I was telling you, Robineau is back,\" he continued, amid the cross-fire of laughter and conversation that went on.
FRENCH   C\'est fini maintenant, je serais trop malheureux, si vous me punissiez en reprenant votre amitié...
FRENCH   Vous en reprendrez en octobre, il en traîne assez dans les rues!  D\'ailleurs, Bourdoncle se chargeait des exécutions.
FRENCH   Mais, dès le lendemain matin, il avait reparu sur le trottoir d\'en face, après avoir passé la nuit dans un hôtel meublé du voisinage.
ENGLISH    In the Rue de la Michodière, Bourras was standing on the foot pavement opposite his house, whence he had been evicted on the previous day by a fine trick, a discovery of the lawyers.
ENGLISH   In proportion as The Ladies\' Paradise became larger, The Old Elbeuf seemed to grow smaller.
FRENCH   Derrière eux, s\'alignaient d\'autres comptoirs, encombrés également de marchandises, que tout un petit peuple de commis examinaient.
FRENCH   L\'art n\'était pas de vendre beaucoup, mais de vendre cher.
ENGLISH    \"Mademoiselle,\" he said at last, trying to maintain a cold severe air, \"there are certain things that we cannot tolerate.
ENGLISH   She, however, thought but little of the menaces which were flying about, entirely absorbed as she was by the anguish caused her by one of Jean\'s adventures, an adventure yet more terrifying than any previous one.
ENGLISH   The worst was their neutral, ill-defined position, something between the shopwoman and the lady.
FRENCH   Mme Cabin tirait le cordon, puis donnait un coup d\'oeil, pour pointer la rentrée.
FRENCH   L\'enfant, câlin comme un petit chat, cachait sa tête, sans prononcer une parole.
ENGLISH   His life dated from then; he could still hear the laughter of a group of little girls, the distant fall of a jet of water, whilst in the warm shade she walked on beside him in silence.
ENGLISH   Was this little savage going to turn out a pretty girl? She looked all the better for her day in the open air, quite charming indeed with her splendid hair waving over her forehead.
FRENCH   Mais il lui fallut dix minutes pour s\'y rendre, tellement la foule augmentait.
FRENCH   Il l\'avait traitée de grue, et ce fut de son air aimable de beau vendeur qu\'il l\'arrêta.
ENGLISH   However, there was a porter collecting from one of the compartments a few parcels for the neighbourhood of the Madeleine; and, on the large sorting-table, sat Campion, the chief clerk, his legs dangling, and his eyes wandering.
ENGLISH   The plans were ready, they were only waiting for the clearing of the Rue du Dix-Décembre to begin digging the foundations.
FRENCH   Puis, il pouvait dire comment on l\'avait traité, comment il était devenu de la famille, soigné lorsqu\'il tombait malade, blanchi et raccommodé, surveillé paternellement, aimé enfin!  -- Bien sûr, répétait Colomban, après chaque cri du patron.
FRENCH   Mais, d\'un geste suppliant, elle l\'arrêtait, elle s\'entêtait à voir, jusqu\'à son dernier souffle.
ENGLISH   They knew for what indulgences they were indebted to her, and they admired her for the strength of her will.
ENGLISH   And then the ladies, still accompanied by Denise, began roaming all over the establishment, making a second appearance in nearly every department.
ENGLISH   Henriette poured the tea out, Madame Marty held the cup, whilst Madame de Boves and Madame Bourdelais contended for the honour of sweetening it.
FRENCH    -- Pourquoi donc? dit l\'autre avec gaieté! Je suis moins fatigué que vous, mon cher.
ENGLISH    For a moment, Denise remained motionless, lost in thought.
FRENCH    À son tour, il pleura.
FRENCH   Jamais il n\'arriverait au cimetière.
ENGLISH    The gas was burning in the dining-room, although they were now in the long days of summer.
FRENCH   On se servit lentement, sans une parole.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! avait crié le vieillard, comme si le coup lui eût retenti dans les entrailles.
FRENCH    There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
FRENCH   À six heures, l\'inventaire était terminé.
ENGLISH   Then she threw some of the common mantles on a counter with a gesture which signified: \"Just see, aren\'t they pitiful?\" Madame Marty dared not think them nice after that; but bent over to murmur in Madame Desforges\'s ear: \"Don\'t you prefer to be served by men? One feels more comfortable?\"  At last Marguerite brought a silk mantle trimmed with jet, which she treated with respect.
ENGLISH   As he handed Hutin the last pieces he resumed in a low tone--\"Oh! I say, I forgot.
FRENCH    -- Vraiment, je ne comprends pas, répétait Mouret.
FRENCH   Elle était assise au milieu de son lit, les reins soutenus par des oreillers.
FRENCH   Elle s\'exhortait au courage, il fallait qu\'elle conquît sa place.
FRENCH   Aussi lorsqu\'elle sortait de son magasin, prenait-elle Pépé chez Bourras; et, au lieu de monter tout de suite, elle allait respirer un peu l\'air des Tuileries, jusqu\'à la fermeture des grilles.
ENGLISH   For her own part, however, she had never given way to such ideas; her sense of right and her healthy nature naturally maintained her in the respectability in which she had always lived.
FRENCH    -- Accompagnez mademoiselle, dit la première, en lui remettant le paletot.
ENGLISH   He did not confess, but blushed, when the young ladies of the mantle department chaffed him; for the pattern-room was not far off, and they had often observed him prowling about the doorway.
FRENCH   Ces demoiselles n\'étaient pas son genre, il affectait de les mépriser, en se vantant plus que jamais d\'aventures extraordinaires avec des clientes: à son comptoir, une baronne avait eu le coup de foudre, et la femme d\'un architecte lui était tombée entre les bras, un jour qu\'il allait chez elle pour une erreur de métrage.
FRENCH   Puis, Favier reprit d\'une voix lente:  -- Si elle est mariée, son mari lui a peut-être bien allongé des gifles.
FRENCH   Un joli rôle, et propre, et intelligent, que de bâiller d\'ennui devant le labeur des autres!  -- C\'est mon seul plaisir, de bâiller devant les autres, dit Vallagnosc en souriant de son air froid.
ENGLISH   Twenty tables were ranged there, in the pale light from the air-holes; quite a crowd of assistants was bustling about, emptying cases, checking goods, and marking them in plain figures, amidst the neighbouring roar of the shoot, which almost drowned their voices.
ENGLISH   After that, he knew no more, his fever had increased hour by hour; all his blood, his whole being, in fact, had been given to her.
FRENCH   Avec des jeunes, les choses se rallument.
FRENCH    -- Dame! répondit Pauline en riant, il exigera peut-être de la reconnaissance...
FRENCH    Cependant, la nouvelle s\'était répandue dans les rayons.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, l\'avant-veille, il lui avait conté carrément les amours de Mouret et de Clara, sans calcul, par bêtise de gros garçon aimant à rire; et, mordue de jalousie, cachant sa blessure sous des airs de dédain, elle venait pour tâcher de découvrir cette fille, une demoiselle des confections, avait-il dit simplement, en refusant de la nommer.
FRENCH   Le soleil luisait encore, un blond soleil d\'été, dont le reflet d\'or tombait par les vitrages des halls.
ENGLISH   His rancour against The Ladies\' Paradise was bursting in his throat.
FRENCH    -- Non, non, je n\'entre pas, j\'ai peur, murmura Mme de Boves.
FRENCH   Tous deux se regardèrent.
FRENCH   Il rentrera ce soir...
ENGLISH   He went into the checking office, where twenty-five young men, junior clerks, checked the debit-notes and calculated the salesmen\'s commissions.
FRENCH   C\'est cela qui a paru le décider.
FRENCH   If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
ENGLISH   Up above, the emptiness seemed heart-breaking; in the lace department an old woman was having every box searched and yet buying nothing; whilst three good-for-nothing minxes in the under-linen department were slowly choosing some collars at eighteen sous a-piece.
FRENCH    -- Non, dit-il, en l\'empêchant de quitter la fenêtre.
FRENCH   Nous bâtissons sur les terrains une galerie de vente, nous démolissons ou nous aménageons les immeubles, et nous ouvrons les magasins les plus vastes de Paris, un bazar qui fera des millions.
ENGLISH   After deriving his fortune and his pleasures from them he intended to throw them all over for those who might still find their account in them.
ENGLISH    This affair amused the ladies.
ENGLISH   Was it not inconceivable? In less than four years they had increased their figures five-fold: the annual receipts, formerly some eight million francs, now attained the sum of forty millions, according to the last balance-sheet.
FRENCH   Une pensée d\'amour-propre l\'empêchait de se livrer si vite, devant ces enfants arrivés du matin.
ENGLISH    \"You are very kind, sir,\" she stammered.
ENGLISH   Born at Montpellier, noisy, and over fond of pleasure, he was not of much good for the sales, but in buying he had not his equal.
FRENCH    Une fois encore, tout le petit commerce ruiné du quartier, défila au convoi.
ENGLISH    The lady made an abrupt gesture.
FRENCH   Je me sauve...
ENGLISH   You\'ll be able to judge whether it\'s worth two thousand francs.\"  But now that she had paid the forfeit she became as arrogant as ever.
ENGLISH   But he still replied no.
FRENCH   C\'était vrai, il leur volait tout: au père, la fortune; à la mère, son enfant mourante; à la fille, un mari attendu depuis dix ans.
ENGLISH   Madeleine was ten, Edmond eight, and Lucien four years old; and they were laughing with joy, it was a cheap treat which they had long looked forward to.
ENGLISH   He knew what a crisis the trade was passing through, and named a silk warehouse which had already been ruined by the vicinity of The Paradise.
FRENCH   Cette nuit, Mme Desforges m\'a promis de me faire rencontrer demain chez elle avec une personne...
FRENCH   Mme Boutarel, tombée cette fois du Midi avec son mari et sa fille, sillonnait les galeries depuis le matin, en quête d\'un trousseau pour cette dernière, qu\'elle mariait.
ENGLISH   The doors were a part of his duty, none ought ever to remain open.
FRENCH   À mesure que le Bonheur des Dames s\'élargissait, il semblait que le Vieil Elbeuf diminuât...
FRENCH    Mais ces dames parlaient maintenant toutes à la fois, tellement excitées, qu\'elles ne s\'écoutaient même plus entre elles.
FRENCH   Elle restait brisée sur la chaise, elle regardait fixement sa cousine, et, au bout d\'un silence, elle demanda:  -- Dites-moi la vérité, il l\'aime?  Denise sentit une rougeur qui lui montait aux joues.
ENGLISH   What most interested Denise, however, was The Ladies\' Paradise opposite, whose windows she could see through the open doorway.
FRENCH   Des écriteaux défilaient.
FRENCH   Et il avait reporté ses regards sur Denise, il la voyait bien, dans le pâle crépuscule: elle était toute chétive auprès d\'Henriette, pourquoi dont lui chauffait-elle ainsi le coeur? C\'était un caprice imbécile.
ENGLISH    \"Well! where are they?\" exclaimed Madame Bourdelais, when she extricated herself from the crowd, after wiping the children\'s faces with her handkerchief.
FRENCH   Voyons, réponds- moi, tu m\'inquiètes.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle was already looking at Madame Aurélie with a discontented air, surprised that she lacked the tact to resign: too old for business, such was his opinion; the knell was about to sound which would sweep away the Lhomme dynasty.
ENGLISH   There, everything escapes me, that\'s my luck in life.\"  And then he, too, burst into tears.
FRENCH   Et le coeur de Mouret était surtout serré par la paix morte du hall: le jour y tombait de haut, d\'un vitrage aux verres dépolis, qui tamisait la clarté en une poussière blanche, diffuse et comme suspendue, sous laquelle le rayon des soieries semblait dormir, au milieu d\'un silence frissonnant de chapelle.
ENGLISH    \"Oh!\" he replied, \"it\'s an extraordinary article, large-grained faille, supple and strong.
ENGLISH    It was Lhomme slowly approaching with the day\'s receipts.
ENGLISH   Although ready to drop with fatigue she could not tear herself away, being retained by so strong an attraction that although she needed nothing she continually retraced her steps, scouring the departments with insatiable curiosity.
FRENCH   Et ces rencontres la ramenaient au continuel regret du magasin, l\'occupaient de la vie intérieure qu\'on y menait, comme si elle ne l\'avait pas quitté.
FRENCH   Puis, il avait dû monter un escalier, s\'engager sur un pont volant, monter encore, tourner dans les charpentes, où les regards du blanc, de la bonneterie, de la mercerie, le suivaient, bayant d\'extase devant cette fortune voyageant en l\'air.
FRENCH   Depuis quelque temps, la jeune fille s\'affaiblissait de jour en jour, et elle avait dû s\'aliter l\'avant-veille.
FRENCH    Pauline souriait d\'un air convaincu.
FRENCH   Faites donc attention, sacré maladroit!  Maintenant, l\'omnibus était arrêté.
FRENCH   Ainsi jetées dans le luxe, souvent sans instruction première, elles formaient une classe à part, innommée.
FRENCH   Chaque semaine, ces derniers toucheraient ainsi leur tant pour cent et leur guelte, sans erreur possible.
FRENCH   Elle les retenait depuis longtemps; mais tout son être défaillait sous l\'insulte.
ENGLISH   Despite his habitual resolution, like all great captains, he felt at the moment of giving battle a superstitious weakness growing on him.
FRENCH    -- Notre clientèle nous aime, papa.
ENGLISH   For months past he had been devoured by passion in this way, remaining on the other side of the street and lacking the courage to declare himself; and this for a girl who was perfectly free, who lived in the Rue Louis-le-Grand, and whom he could have spoken to any evening! Clara herself appeared to have no idea of her conquest.
ENGLISH    \"What astonishes me,\" resumed Henriette, \"is that Monsieur Mouret should tolerate such insolence.
FRENCH   Il murmura:  -- C\'est qu\'ils nous flanqueraient très bien dehors...
ENGLISH   And she realised that it was Pauline, by hearing the door next to her own open.
FRENCH   Et Deloche aussi couchait avec elle: ils se retrouvaient sans cesse dans les coins noirs, ils causaient pendant des heures.
FRENCH   Un garçon l\'ayant conduite sous les combles et remise entre les mains de Mme Cabin, chargée du nettoyage et de la surveillance des chambres, celle-ci l\'installa au numéro 7, où l\'on avait déjà monté sa malle.
ENGLISH   All your wants will be provided for.\"  He raised his head.
ENGLISH    \"Well, mademoiselle, have you succeeded?\" inquired a timid voice, as she at last reached the pavement.
FRENCH    -- Non, non, c\'est fini, bonsoir...
FRENCH   Elle ne savait de quel pied sortir, au milieu de tout ce monde.
FRENCH    -- Cinq cent quatre-vingt-sept mille, deux cent dix francs, trente centimes! cria le caissier dont la face molle et usée semblait s\'éclairer d\'un coup de soleil, au reflet d\'une pareille somme.
FRENCH   Oui, vous avez été la camarade de cette femme, et j\'ai vu Colomban vous poursuivre, vous parler à voix basse.
FRENCH    To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate   Section 5.
FRENCH    -- Vous nous restez, j\'ai parié ma tête...
ENGLISH   In the dark vaults to the right and the left were the reserve goods, shadowy behind the gratings.
ENGLISH   He had watched the duel between Henriette and Mouret with the curiosity of a man who still felt greatly interested in other people\'s love battles; and he divined that the crisis had arrived, he guessed the pending drama, being well acquainted with the story of that girl Denise whom he had seen in the ante-room.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, le quartier était en révolution; on venait le contempler au milieu de ces richesses, perdant la tête, ne retrouvant pas ses habitudes.
FRENCH   Bouthemont lui-même, que les histoires gaillardes épanouissaient, ne put se tenir de lâcher une plaisanterie, dont le mauvais goût le fit éclater d\'aise.
FRENCH   Et de là était né son vif désir de connaître le baron Hartmann, lorsqu\'il avait appris que le Crédit Immobilier, par un traité passé avec l\'administration, prenait l\'engagement de percer et d\'établir la rue du Dix-Décembre, à la condition qu\'on lui abandonnerait la propriété des terrains en bordure.
ENGLISH   As a rule the cloth was then laid for Baudu, Geneviève, and the first-hand; a second lunch being served at eleven o\'clock for Madame Baudu, the other young man, and the young woman.
FRENCH   Les deux dames du premier recevaient des visites très tard; et parfois un homme se trompait, montait donner des coups de poing dans sa porte.
ENGLISH   You understand, eh? Like this we shall be sure that they won\'t pass any, for rather than do that they\'ll be inventing mistakes!\"  He began to laugh, whilst the other looked at him admiringly.
FRENCH   Montrez-moi les listes.
FRENCH    Favier se dégagea enfin et prit l\'escalier des réfectoires.
FRENCH   En voyant les clientes arriver, il fit même fermer un instant les portes; et il répétait qu\'il n\'ouvrirait pas, plutôt que de laisser les ombrelles bleues au centre.
FRENCH   Mais elle partit confuse, lorsque, en réponse à son souhait innocent d\'une bonne nuit, Pauline cria étourdiment:  -- Merci, la nuit sera bonne!  La porte particulière qui menait à l\'appartement de Mouret et aux chambres du personnel, se trouvait rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin.
FRENCH    Brusquement, il s\'était arrêté devant elle.
FRENCH   Redressez-vous donc, mademoiselle, donnez-lui toute son importance.
ENGLISH   Each person has his ideas, my girl.
FRENCH   Alors, juste devant eux, au-dessus du gros homme, ils aperçurent une enseigne verte, dont les lettres jaunes déteignaient sous la pluie: _Au Vieil Elbeuf draps et flanelles, Baudu, successeur de Hauchecorne_.
FRENCH   Mon Dieu! il y avait un peu de tout parmi elles, des coquines et de braves filles.
FRENCH    -- Va donc! répéta Denise, en le poussant toujours.
ENGLISH   And again they crossed the parcels office, and reached the foot of the stairs leading out into the Rue de la Michodière.
ENGLISH   You can still work; you\'ll see how happy we shall be!\"  She let her forehead fall near her husband\'s pale face, and both remained speechless, in the emotion of their anguish.
FRENCH   Il faut battre le fer pendant qu\'il est chaud.
ENGLISH   And she immediately recognised the unfortunate fellow who had fainted away there in the road, his clothes covered with mud.
FRENCH   Elle se passerait bien encore de bottines, ce mois-là; mais, en joignant même aux trente francs qui lui restaient, les quatre francs mis de côté sou à sou, cela ne lui ferait jamais que trente-quatre francs; et, où prendrait-elle six francs pour compléter la somme? C\'était une angoisse dont son coeur défaillait.
FRENCH   Je n\'ai pas voulu risquer les enfants dans cette foule.
ENGLISH   It was in vain that he roamed about the building: his fixed idea remained fast in his mind, and as his power unfolded itself before him, as the mechanism of the business and the army of employees passed before his gaze, he felt more deeply than ever the taunt of his powerlessness.
ENGLISH    \"I must have a hundred francs by Sunday,\" said Hutin.
FRENCH    Elle était debout, la face blanche, l\'écoutant, le regardant toujours en face.
FRENCH    Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
FRENCH    Brusquement, il baissa la tête.
FRENCH   Il couchait donc avec, qu\'il la défendait ainsi? Quelle brute! il aurait mérité une paire de gifles, pour apprendre à se conduire.
ENGLISH   Lying now on the bare wood, now in open boxes, and now protruding from overflowing drawers was a quantity of silk handkerchiefs of every hue.
FRENCH   Boeuf sauce piquante...», se suivaient comme des litanies; pendant que, sans relâche, le cuisinier piquait des morceaux et les arrosait de sauce, avec le mouvement rapide et rythmique d\'une horloge bien réglée.
FRENCH   En décembre, Baudu, terrifié par le chiffre des billets souscrits, se résigna au plus cruel des sacrifices: il vendit sa maison de campagne de Rambouillet, une maison qui lui coûtait tant d\'argent en réparations continuelles, et dont les locataires ne l\'avaient pas même payé, lorsqu\'il s\'était décidé à en tirer parti.
FRENCH   Je ne vous ennuierai plus.
FRENCH   Depuis que j\'ai à me battre contre les huissiers, je sais que le gredin recherche mes créances, histoire sans doute de me jouer un vilain tour.
ENGLISH   The little one was sleeping.
ENGLISH   Suddenly, without moving her head, her eyes fixed on the ceiling, his wife spoke again: \"Have you noticed your daughter lately?\"  \"No,\" he replied.
ENGLISH   Ladies took off their gloves, and wrote letters on the paper stamped with the name of the establishment, through which they ran their pens.
FRENCH   Puis, elles disparaissaient dans le vestibule, changé en un salon oriental.
FRENCH   Denise elle-même crut au succès.
ENGLISH    Baugé, however, was annoyed by the joke about the staid propriety and innocence of his establishment, and all at once he retorted: \"Oh, you needn\'t talk, you are not so well off at The Ladies\' Paradise.
ENGLISH    But across the road The Ladies\' Paradise glowed with its deep, serried lines of gas jets.
ENGLISH   \"For instance, I recommend you our Golden Grain, a taffeta of incomparable brilliancy.
ENGLISH   It\'s enough to make us have the pockets of each one searched before he leaves!\"  Murmurs were heard.
FRENCH   Jean était devant elle.
FRENCH   C\'était une salle carrée, avec un large comptoir de marbre; aux deux bouts, des fontaines argentées laissaient couler un mince filet d\'eau; derrière, sur des tablettes, s\'alignaient des bouteilles.
ENGLISH    However, Pauline still questioned her in a friendly way.
ENGLISH   Then silence fell again, more sinister than ever, and a fresh crash was heard, then another, and another; the Robineaus, the Bédorés, the Vanpouilles, were cracking and falling in their turn; all the small shops of the Saint-Roch quarter were disappearing beneath an invisible pick, with the sudden, thundering noise of bricks falling from a cart.
FRENCH   C\'était abominable, on traînait dans la boue l\'honneur de sa race, le monde semblait en craquer.
FRENCH   Et il répondit, après avoir regardé sa petite robe propre, sa tournure honnête:  -- Ça ne fait pas pour vous.
FRENCH   En bas, autour d\'elle, continuait le remous de la foule, dont le double courant d\'entrée et de sortie se faisait sentir jusqu\'au rayon de la soie: foule encore très mêlée, où pourtant l\'après-midi amenait davantage de dames, parmi les petites-bourgeoises et les ménagères; beaucoup de femmes en deuil, avec leurs grands voiles; toujours des nourrices fourvoyées, protégeant leurs poupons de leurs coudes élargis.
FRENCH   Il affectait de vouloir s\'instruire, il posait des questions: d\'où venaient-elles en général? avaient-elles d\'aussi mauvaises moeurs qu\'on le disait? Toute une discussion s\'engagea.
FRENCH    -- Ah! très bien, dit-il tout à fait décontenancé.
ENGLISH    He was greeted with an acclamation of triumph and was obliged to step forward; the ladies making room for him in their midst.
ENGLISH   However, Bouthemont had just recognised Madame Desforges, and anxious to pay his court to such a handsome lady, who was supposed to be all-powerful with the governor, he came forward, with rather coarse amiability.
FRENCH    Et, pendant que Favier métrait, elle fit une dernière tentative sur Bouthemont, resté près d\'elle.
FRENCH    Il l\'interrompit d\'un geste violent.
FRENCH   Favier et deux commis, sur des escabeaux, vidaient les casiers, passaient au fur et à mesure les pièces d\'étoffe à Hutin, qui, debout au milieu d\'une table, criait les chiffres, après avoir consulté les étiquettes; et il jetait ensuite les pièces par terre, elles encombraient peu à peu le parquet, elles montaient comme une marée d\'automne.
FRENCH   Pourquoi elle, si chétive? pourquoi sa petite main pesant tout d\'un coup si lourd, au milieu de la besogne du monstre? Et la force qui balayait tout, l\'emportait à son tour, elle dont la venue devait être une revanche.
FRENCH   Elle voulait l\'aller trouver, elle lui expliquerait les choses, pour le renseigner simplement; car il lui était égal de partir, lorsqu\'il saurait la vérité.
FRENCH   Puis, en bas, dans des casiers, sur des tables, au milieu d\'un empilement de coupons, débordaient des articles de bonneterie vendus pour rien, gants et fichus de laine tricotés, capelines, gilets, tout un étalage d\'hiver, aux couleurs bariolées, chinées, rayées, avec des taches saignantes de rouge.
FRENCH   Les journaux en avaient tant parlé, qu\'elles s\'attendaient à quelque chose de plus fort et de plus brillant.
ENGLISH   Let\'s go and rejoin Madame de Boves.\"  However, on the landing of the great central staircase they were again stopped by the Japanese department.
ENGLISH   Mouret no longer treated with a contractor at a fixed rate; he had taken the kitchen into his own hands, organizing it like one of the departments, with a head-cook, under-cooks and an inspector; and if he spent more money he got on the other hand more work out of the staff--a practical humanitarian calculation which had long terrified Bourdoncle.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! dit-elle en se levant, je vais envoyer un garçon me chercher des oranges...
FRENCH    Mouret en était arrivé à une stupeur d\'indignation.
FRENCH    Le commis vidait la seconde caisse, pendant que Bouthemont s\'était remis à pointer les pièces, en consultant la facture.
FRENCH   de Boves et Vallagnosc, qui marchaient en avant avec Mme Guibal, arrivaient au rayon des dentelles.
FRENCH   La fille, les mains tombées sur les genoux, regardait le vide devant elle.
FRENCH   Oh! son affaire est grave...
ENGLISH   From the linen department on her left came a paler gleam, bluey, like a house front under a summer sky at night; then she wished to cross the central hall, but on running up against some piles of printed calico, she thought it safer to traverse the hosiery department, and then the woollen one.
FRENCH    Denise, ainsi renseignée, demeura debout.
ENGLISH   Oh! such a bargain!\"  Then suddenly Madame Marty asked: \"How much did the silk cost?\"  And off they started again, all together.
FRENCH    Lorsque, le lendemain, Denise se rendit avec Pépé chez l\'oncle Baudu, la rue était justement barrée par une file de tombereaux, qui déchargeaient des briques devant l\'ancien Hôtel Duvillard.
FRENCH   Depuis 1845, il occupait la maison, pour laquelle il avait un bail de trente années, moyennant un loyer de dix huit cents francs; et, comme il rattrapait un millier de francs avec ses quatre chambres garnies, il payait huit cents francs la boutique.
ENGLISH   Then he showed her a cheviot, some diagonals, some greys, every sort of woollens, which she felt out of curiosity, just for the pleasure of doing so, decided at heart to take no matter what.
FRENCH   Celui-ci s\'était hâté de le mener dans son cabinet, où il le tranquillisa sur les suites possibles.
FRENCH   Le jour où elle aperçut le fils de Mme Aurélie donnant un billet à la lingère, Deloche justement lui demandait si elle avait bien déjeuné, par besoin de s\'intéresser à elle, et ne trouvant rien de plus aimable.
ENGLISH   Madame Hédouin\'s portrait was still smiling, with its painted lips; Mouret had fallen on his table, on the million which he could no longer see.
FRENCH   Près de chaque caisse, des garçons en livrée délivraient la prime, sous la surveillance d\'un inspecteur.
ENGLISH    \"It really isn\'t bad for five francs sixty centimes,\" said Madame Desforges, who had succeeded in getting hold of a piece at the edge of the table.
FRENCH   Hutin, un peu inquiet, comprit qu\'il s\'agissait d\'abord d\'une fourniture pour celles-ci.
ENGLISH   The central group above the door was being gilded, whilst the pedestals destined to support statues of the manufacturing cities of France, were being fixed on the acroteria.
ENGLISH   Mignot, going out one day with a parcel under his coat, notwithstanding the regulations, was nearly caught, and really thought himself lost.
FRENCH    -- Une réclame! une réclame! En tout cas, celle-ci sera en pierre, et elle nous enterrera tous.
FRENCH   Denise et Henriette, qu\'il n\'avait cessé de guetter, passaient enfin derrière lui, après avoir eu beaucoup de mal à se dégager de la foule.
FRENCH   Au-dehors, malgré les fenêtres closes et les rideaux tirés, on entendait ronfler les machines des travaux d\'en face.
ENGLISH   Why should it be she, who was so puny? Why should her small hand suddenly become so powerful amidst the monster\'s work? And the force which swept everything away, carried her along in her turn, she, whose coming was to be revenge.
FRENCH   Il faisait si chaud, si étouffé dans la petite pièce que Pépé s\'était endormi sur la table, et que les yeux de Jean lui-même se fermaient.
FRENCH   On me ramassera bien.
FRENCH   Aussi, en abordant Octave, avait-il le rire discret d\'un protecteur riche, qui, s\'il veut bien se montrer charmant, ne consent pas à être dupe.
ENGLISH   Mouret, who had relapsed into his former lassitude, had listened in an absent-minded way, without understanding, while Bouthemont, worried by the adventure, remained buried in thought.
FRENCH   Elle l\'aimait beaucoup.
ENGLISH   I have calculated that their catalogued articles are offered at fifteen per cent.
ENGLISH   Thrown into the midst of luxury, often without any primary instruction, they formed a nameless class apart from all others.
ENGLISH   Don\'t you see that they\'ll fight together over this silk?\"  \"No doubt,\" interrupted the other, obstinately, \"and the more they buy, the more we shall lose.\"  \"We shall lose a few sous on the stuff, very likely.
FRENCH   Des vendeurs spéciaux, des Parisiens fainéants et blagueurs, écoulaient ainsi des quantités considérables de petits objets de camelote.
ENGLISH   It seemed to her that she was again quite a little girl and burst into tears, in their garden at Valognes, on seeing the blackcaps eat up the spiders, which themselves devoured the flies.
ENGLISH   \"I know her, and it isn\'t true.
ENGLISH   It was Marguerite who proved intelligent enough to go and ask the first-hand a question.
FRENCH    Alors, Mouret acheva de perdre toute tranquillité.
ENGLISH   It\'s inevitable, my dear, we all come to it sooner or later.
FRENCH   Et il se tourna, il salua sa cliente du salut discret d\'un ami, qui ne veut pas compromettre une femme en l\'arrêtant au milieu du monde.
ENGLISH   Silence reigned in the drawing-room with its gay hangings, and decorated with such a profusion of green plants that there was like a small wood between the two windows.
FRENCH   Des clameurs, des applaudissements accueillirent leur entrée; et il rayonnait, il bombait la poitrine en se dandinant avec le roulis des marins, il étalait un coup de poing qui lui bleuissait la joue, tout gonflé de la joie d\'être remarqué.
FRENCH   Ce fut un soulagement, Mme Robineau l\'embrassa, très émue, en jurant qu\'elle la regretterait toujours.
FRENCH   Un franc le mètre, comprenez-vous!  -- Tiens! dit Mme Bourdelais surprise, que voulez-vous donc en faire?  -- Ma foi, je ne sais pas...
FRENCH   Justement, elle venait d\'avoir une alerte, le père Jouve avait failli la surprendre causant avec son mari, derrière une pile de torchons.
FRENCH    Jean restait béant, la face pâle.
FRENCH    -- Tenez, on a glissé.
FRENCH   On y arrivait par une complication d\'escaliers et de couloirs.
FRENCH   Et, tout d\'un coup, elle éclata en sanglots, la tête appuyée sur l\'épaule de son amie.
FRENCH   Mme Aurélie s\'écarta, causa un moment avec eux d\'une commande de paletots qu\'elle comptait faire chez un des gros entrepreneurs de Paris; d\'ordinaire, elle achetait directement et sous sa responsabilité; mais, pour les achats importants, elle préférait consulter la direction.
FRENCH    -- Je sais bien, murmura-t-il, que les vieux manquent de flamme...
ENGLISH   At the far end, the two young men and the young woman were still working, talking in low sibilant whispers amongst themselves.
ENGLISH   He had given her some silk to stitch, some lace to repair.
FRENCH   Au second étage, il visitait le service des expéditions, cherchait des querelles, s\'exaspérait sourdement contre la régularité parfaite de la machine qu\'il avait réglée lui-même.
FRENCH   Je vous le disais bien, qu\'il y avait ici une affaire d\'or!  Lui, venait de prendre un restaurant à Vincennes.
FRENCH    L\'oncle Baudu était oublié.
FRENCH   Bourdoncle, qui l\'avait rejoint, semblait moins inquiet, tout en l\'étudiant encore de minces coups d\'oeil.
ENGLISH   \"Six francs!\" said she.
ENGLISH   She was walking slowly on account of her foot.
ENGLISH   \"Very well, you won\'t tell me anything.
FRENCH   Sans doute, le client était satisfait, puisque, en fin de compte, c\'était le client qui bénéficiait de la baisse des prix.
ENGLISH    The young girl did not reply but seemed to be obstinately studying a rent in the cloth, though really absorbed in the reflections passing through her mind.
FRENCH    V   Le lendemain, Denise était descendue au rayon depuis une demi- heure à peine, lorsque Mme Aurélie lui dit de sa voix brève.
FRENCH   Hutin, les lèvres pâles, avait détourné la tête.
ENGLISH   The lifts were besieged by people; there was a crush at the refreshment-bar and in the reading-room; quite a nation was moving about in these snowy regions.
FRENCH   Et ce cube énorme, ce colossal bazar leur bouchait le ciel, leur paraissait être pour quelque chose dans le froid dont ils grelottaient, au fond de leurs comptoirs glacés.
FRENCH   Cependant, la caisse s\'était vidée, deux hommes en déclouaient une autre.
ENGLISH   And they were about to carry the stretcher into the back-room when Gaujean arrived.
ENGLISH   To make a machine solid and strong, it is necessary to use good iron; if the iron breaks or is broken, a stoppage of work, repeated expenses of restarting, quite a loss of power, ensue.
FRENCH   On s\'écrasait surtout devant l\'étalage intérieur, dressé par Hutin, et où Mouret avait donné les touches du maître.
FRENCH    Bourdoncle hochait la tête de satisfaction.
FRENCH   Après une grande minute, elle déclara seulement de son air réfléchi:  -- Ce mariage avec Colomban, je crois qu\'il vaudrait mieux en finir.
FRENCH    Il sortit une minute, et revint dîner, car Mme Baudu ne voulait absolument pas qu\'il repartît sans manger au moins une soupe.
FRENCH   Pour sa mise en vente des nouveautés d\'été, il avait lancé deux cent mille catalogues, dont cinquante mille à l\'étranger, traduits dans toutes les langues.
FRENCH   Tant pis! on m\'a envoyée là-haut, à l\'atelier, pour un poignet.
FRENCH   Chaque jour, elle le voyait passer sous sa fenêtre.
FRENCH   Pourvu que tu te contentes, ça me contente, mon bon chéri.
FRENCH   Marguerite et Clara la poursuivaient d\'une haine instinctive, serraient les rangs pour ne pas être mangées par cette nouvelle venue, qu\'elles redoutaient sous leur affectation de dédain.
FRENCH    Cependant, Mme Aurélie ne savait comment sortir à son tour, d\'une façon décente.
FRENCH   Puis, demeurant rue Cuvier, il avait épousé la fille de son concierge, petit tailleur alsacien; et, depuis ce jour, il était resté soumis devant sa femme, dont les facultés commerciales le frappaient de respect.
ENGLISH   It\'s rather dark in your ante-room.\"  \"Yes,\" added Madame Marty, \"I was wondering where I had seen that figure before.
ENGLISH   She was constantly exposed to offensive remarks, cruel inventions, a series of slights which cut her to the heart, in her longing for affection.
FRENCH   Il avait une cravate blanche toute neuve, prise au rayon de la lingerie, et dont le noeud, très large, luisait comme une neige.
ENGLISH   However, the happy day was drawing near, and the girls chattered away more than ever, relating their preparations in the way of dress, just as if they were going on a six months\' tour, whilst Denise had to listen to them, pale and silent in her abandonment.
FRENCH    -- Je veille, je veille, répondait-il.
ENGLISH   The bell, at an hour\'s interval, had already announced the first two dinners; the third was about to be served, and in the departments there now only remained a few lingering customers, whose fever for spending money had made them forget the time.
FRENCH   Elle n\'osait le remettre chez Mme Gras et ne pouvait pourtant le laisser seul dans sa chambre, enfermé du matin au soir.
FRENCH   Enfin, elle murmura:  -- Je suis venue tout de suite...
FRENCH    -- Entrez, dirent à leur tour les deux femmes.
FRENCH    Mais l\'ouvrière s\'échappait en riant, et Liénard se trouva devant Mme Desforges, à laquelle il ne put s\'empêcher de demander:  -- Que désire madame?  Elle voulait une robe pas chère, solide pourtant.
ENGLISH    \"Madame Aurélie,\" he called curtly.
FRENCH   Mme Baudu emmena Pépé, pour lui montrer des images.
FRENCH   Et puis, M.
FRENCH   Elle entendit Clara dire d\'une voix aiguë:  -- Madame, je suis arrivée avant elle.
FRENCH   Et, d\'ailleurs, tu n\'as qu\'à me suivre, si tu veux tout voir, car aujourd\'hui je reste sur la brèche.
ENGLISH   You can\'t leave her to die like this!\"  At last he spoke, quite overcome.
FRENCH   L\'utilité publique était déclarée depuis dix-huit mois, le jury d\'expropriation venait d\'être nommé, tout le quartier se passionnait pour cette trouée énorme, s\'inquiétant de l\'époque des travaux, s\'intéressant aux maisons condamnées.
ENGLISH   Do up my dress or mamma might see my shoulders.
FRENCH   Par moments, il levait les yeux sur sa soeur, dont la main brûlante, secouée de légers tressaillements, l\'étonnait:  -- Tenez! reprit gaiement Mouret, voulez-vous être mon ambassadeur? Demain, j\'avais l\'intention d\'augmenter encore mon offre, de faire proposer à Bourras quatre-vingt mille francs...
ENGLISH   So much the worse for those who did not know how to look after themselves!  Nothing else was now talked of in the various departments.
FRENCH    Denise avait dû se mettre à la vente, dans la prise d\'assaut du rayon.
FRENCH   C\'était l\'envahissement définitif des journaux, des murs, des oreilles du public, comme une monstrueuse trompette d\'airain, qui, sans relâche, soufflait aux quatre coins de la terre le vacarme des grandes mises en vente.
ENGLISH   \"Can\'t you be more careful? You\'re always getting into some stupid scrape!\"  He struck his chest.
FRENCH   On ne l\'avait pas aperçue.
ENGLISH   But Bourdoncle shrugged his shoulders: a cook who had four hundred luncheons and four hundred dinners to serve, even in three series, had no time to waste on the refinements of his art.
ENGLISH   Not a partition remained standing; on the ground there was nothing but a heap of rubbish, the dung of the past cast, as it were, at the street corner.
FRENCH   Et, du buffet même, ces dames commencèrent à sentir le rayon de parfumerie, une odeur pénétrante de sachet enfermé, qui embaumait la galerie.
ENGLISH   On Jouve\'s report, he decided on the dismissal of Deloche, a stupid fellow, who was always being robbed and who never had any authority over customers.
FRENCH    Pauline courut à la porte jeter un coup d\'oeil.
ENGLISH   And this enormous cube, this colossal bazaar which concealed the sky from them, seemed in some degree the cause of the cold which made them shiver behind their frozen counters.
FRENCH   Et elles s\'attardèrent devant leurs tasses, les lingères en laine, d\'une simplicité de petites bourgeoises, les confectionneuses en soie, la serviette au menton pour ne pas attraper de taches, pareilles à des dames qui seraient descendues manger à l\'office, avec leurs femmes de chambre.
ENGLISH   Outside nothing was heard but the rolling of the last cabs breaking upon the husky voice of Paris, a snort like that of a satiated ogre digesting all the linens and cloths, silks and laces with which he had been gorged since the morning.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s quite unnecessary, Mademoiselle will have the kindness to conduct this lady.\"  Denise, quite confused, at once took charge of the parcel and the debit-note.
FRENCH    -- Cent sous! criait chaque fois Jean.
FRENCH   Madame en achètera un autre ailleurs.
ENGLISH    \"Do you want anything, Monsieur Jouve?\" exclaimed Mouret.
ENGLISH   They\'ve sent for a doctor.
FRENCH   Ça se passe chez un marchand de vin de la rue Saint-Honoré, qui leur loue une salle, le samedi.
ENGLISH   \"Perhaps there is something I can do for you.\"  \"No, no.\" Geneviève\'s glance was still obstinately fixed on her father, who remained standing there with a bewildered air, almost choking.
FRENCH    Depuis un instant, Mme Marty, très excitée par la conversation, retournait fiévreusement son sac de cuir rouge sur ses genoux.
FRENCH   Depuis longtemps, Jouve qui guettait celle-ci, lui avait fait part de ses doutes; aussi ne fut-il pas étonné, lorsque l\'inspecteur le mit au courant d\'un mot; du reste, des cas si extraordinaires lui passaient par les mains, qu\'il déclarait la femme capable de tout, dès que la rage du chiffon l\'emportait.
ENGLISH   Favier had been left behind with merely fifty-two francs, in fact the whole lot had been floored.
FRENCH   Et il acheva de l\'enchanter, en disant:  -- Ah! Beethoven, ah! Mozart...
ENGLISH   The wind was falling and they no longer heard anything but the loud flow of the stream.
ENGLISH   Then she smiled, her heart at rest, feeling within herself naught but goodness and prudence, a love of truth and logic which constituted all her strength.
ENGLISH   Here too at either end of the window, were huge piles of the two silks which were the exclusive property of the establishment, the \"Paris Delight\" and the \"Golden Grain\"--articles of exceptional quality destined to revolutionize the silk trade.
ENGLISH   But this was a mere trifle, which could be increased tenfold, for later on, in certain departments, he certainly hoped to turn the capital over fifteen or twenty times in the course of the twelvemonth.
FRENCH   «Je l\'aime, je l\'aime», et cela s\'élargissait: il avait raison, il ne pouvait en épouser une autre.
ENGLISH   I know,\" he replied in a broken voice, \"you don\'t love me.
FRENCH    -- Pourquoi ne vous établissez-vous pas? dit-elle tout d\'un coup, en se dégageant.
FRENCH   Ils couchaient sur leurs positions, face à face, avec le massacre de leurs marchandises autour d\'eux.
FRENCH    -- Ah! disait le jeune homme, si elle réussissait jamais autre part, je voudrais qu\'elle rentrât ici, pour leur mettre le pied sur la gorge, à toutes ces pas grand-chose!  Et ce fut Bourdoncle qui, dans cette affaire, supporta le choc violent de Mouret.
FRENCH   Baudu suivait le corbillard, d\'un pas lourd et machinal; et il avait refusé d\'un signe le bras de Jean, qui marchait près de lui.
ENGLISH   In his continual nervous torment, he often skipped like this from despair to hope.
FRENCH   Puis-je vous attacher au cou un pareil pavé? Au lieu de vous laisser une bonne affaire, je vous laisserais une faillite peut-être.
ENGLISH    \"No, no.
FRENCH   Lui aussi sortait du Bonheur des Dames, et il paraissait plus effrayé qu\'elle, tout ahuri de l\'interrogatoire qu\'il venait de subir.
ENGLISH   Then the base of the first floor, of enamelled brickwork, supported large windows, above which came another frieze formed of gilded escutcheons emblazoned with the arms of the chief towns of France, and designs in terra-cotta, in whose enamel one again found the light coloured tints of the base.
ENGLISH   Denise listened, and had she been ignorant of her love, she could no longer have doubted it after the suffering she felt at the allusions to those two women.
FRENCH   Quand il la vit muette, il tourna sa colère contre les gens d\'en face, il tendait les poings dans le vide, du côté du chantier, où l\'on posait, cette nuit-là, des charpentes de fer, à grands coups de marteau.
ENGLISH   I didn\'t like to risk bringing the children into this crowd.\"  Thereupon she went away, preceded by the salesman carrying the twenty-five yards of silk, who led her to pay-desk No.
FRENCH   Celle-ci avait sans doute deviné le nouveau coup reçu par la jeune fille, car ses yeux navrés allèrent d\'elle à Colomban, puis se reportèrent sur le Bonheur.
ENGLISH   With an angry shake she freed herself.
FRENCH   Et tant mieux, s\'ils se promènent! Ils auront l\'air plus nombreux, ils augmenteront la foule.
FRENCH   Que faire? et il se décidait à entrer chez Bourdoncle, lorsqu\'il aperçut Mouret, qui traversait la galerie.
ENGLISH   What Bourras did not openly mention, was the frightful misery into which he himself had fallen, bewildered by the worries which besiege the small trader who is on the road to ruin and yet remains obstinate even under a shower of protested bills.
FRENCH   Cent millions! mon Dieu! cent millions!  Denise n\'avait rien à répondre.
ENGLISH   In the first place, in the foreground of one engraving, were the Rue du Dix-Décembre, the Rue de la Michodière, and the Rue Monsigny, filled with little black figures, and endowed with wondrous breadth, as if to make room for the customers of the whole world.
ENGLISH   But we can\'t allow such things to go on here.\"  \"Never fear,\" replied Bouthemont, \"you shall have proofs one of these days.
FRENCH   L\'odeur des draps et des teintures, une odeur âpre de chimie, semblait décuplée par l\'humidité du plancher.
ENGLISH   Vadon, \"have you seen her boots?\"  \"And her dress!\" murmured the other.
FRENCH   Ses regards, continuellement, retournaient à la glace, en face d\'elle.
ENGLISH    \"Well I never,\" said she, after a pause, \"that _is_ a shop!\"  They were at the corner of the Rue de la Michodière and the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, in front of a draper\'s shop, whose windows displayed a wealth of bright colour in the soft, pale October light.
FRENCH   Ma foi, tu te rappelles, je ne mordais guère à leurs machines, bien qu\'au fond je ne me sois jamais jugé plus bête qu\'un autre.
FRENCH   Le rayon des lainages débordait d\'une foule compacte, toutes les petites-bourgeoises s\'y portaient, tâtaient les étoffes, s\'absorbaient en muets calculs; et elle dut s\'asseoir un instant.
ENGLISH   An inspector had the idea that Mignot was stealing.
ENGLISH   He turned towards his table, took up some papers and then at once laid them down again, saying: \"I will detain you no longer, mademoiselle; I cannot keep you against your will.\"  \"But I don\'t wish to go away,\" replied she, smiling.
FRENCH   S\'il en avait découvert le moyen, il aurait fait passer la rue au travers de sa maison.
FRENCH   Cette nudité était la preuve visible du relevé complet et exact de l\'inventaire.
ENGLISH   At last, towards one o\'clock she went to bed.
FRENCH   Minuit sonnait, quand il emplit les tasses.
FRENCH   Pourtant, sa jolie tête, aux cheveux sombres, gardait sa finesse aimable.
ENGLISH   I promise you that, little sister.
ENGLISH   They had made the tour of the other departments on the first floor--they had passed through the lace, the shawls, the furs, the furniture and the under-linen, and were now winding up with the mantles.
ENGLISH    \"Good night, sir,\" murmured Denise, continuing on her way without waiting.
FRENCH   Puis, après la queue du monde, venaient trois voitures de deuil.
ENGLISH   For the last fortnight he had resisted Henriette\'s wish that he should consent to this interview; not that he felt any immoderate jealousy of Mouret, but because this was the third friend Henriette had introduced to him, and he was afraid of becoming ridiculous at last.
ENGLISH   The mothers completely lost their heads.
ENGLISH   When she saw him tortured by her refusal, atoning so fully for his former disdain for woman, he seemed to her to make amends for many of his faults.
ENGLISH   They expected to finish by about ten o\'clock.
FRENCH   Denise, dans une obscurité complète, ne distinguait rien, sentait seulement la fraîcheur des vieux plâtres mouillés.
FRENCH   Comme on suffoquait dans l\'étroite salle, chauffée par le bec de gaz, la bonne dut rouvrir la fenêtre; et la pestilence humide de la cour souffla sur la table.
FRENCH   Et ce fut Bouthemont qui dut plaider la cause du Bonheur.
ENGLISH   \"Whenever that lady is here you never seem to finish.
FRENCH   Du reste, Mme de Boves n\'était pas là, et Henriette s\'impatientait, lorsqu\'elle aperçut Vallagnosc, qui cherchait aussi sa femme et sa belle-mère.
ENGLISH    It was the day\'s receipts, the highest that The Ladies\' Paradise had ever attained.
FRENCH   On l\'avait longtemps plaisantée sur son début fâcheux; les mots de «sabot», de «tête de pioche» circulaient, celles qui manquaient une vente étaient envoyées à Valognes, elle passait enfin pour la bête du comptoir.
ENGLISH   \"Ah, they\'re not stingy of fine words.
ENGLISH   What was the use of wishing or not wishing, since things never turned out as one desired?  And as an example of this he mentioned his future father-in-law, who had expected to find in Madame Guibal an indolent blonde, the caprice of an hour, but was now led by her with a whip, like an old horse on its last legs.
ENGLISH   For ten minutes they blocked up all the streets; and the shopkeepers standing at their doors thought bitterly of their one assistant, whom they hardly knew how to find food for.
ENGLISH   A vague connection arose in his mind: the robbery perpetrated by that unfortunate woman, that last folly of the conquered customer laid low at the feet of the tempter, evoked the proud and avenging image of Denise, whose victorious heel he could feel upon his throat.
FRENCH    On soulevait le brancard.
FRENCH   On vous écrira.
ENGLISH   It was true, however.
ENGLISH   \"My inkstand will suffice, we\'ll dip together.\"  Mademoiselle de Fontenailles, brutified by her unfortunate position, could not even find a word of gratitude.
FRENCH    See paragraph 1.C below.
ENGLISH    \"Hallo, Paul!\" suddenly exclaimed a voice behind the two gentlemen.
ENGLISH   And looking at Denise, whom he could now see, in the pale twilight, she appeared to him very puny compared to Henriette.
ENGLISH   They must have seen her, for they all disappeared, laughing.
FRENCH   Eh bien! il se passe de jolies choses chez toi!  -- Oh! dit Mouret en souriant, ces dames ne sont point ici chez moi, elles sont chez elles.
ENGLISH    \"Have you any other references in Paris? Where do you live?\"  \"At my uncle\'s,\" she murmured, hesitating to name him for she feared that they would never engage the niece of a competitor.
ENGLISH   Things were being offered around her more feverishly than ever.
FRENCH   Il coupait simplement la lisière.
ENGLISH   The young ladies dressed in regulation silk, and promenading their charms about, without ever sitting down on the dozen chairs reserved for the customers, completed the resemblance.
ENGLISH   It was a sort of punishment on them, for breaking up their home, for the mother had resumed her little excursions with her lady friends, and the father on his side continued his musical performances.
ENGLISH    \"As you are on our side,\" said he, laughing, \"why do you stay with our adversaries? I was told too that you lodged with Bourras.\"  \"A very worthy man,\" she murmured.
FRENCH   Baugé devait venir prendre ces demoiselles à huit heures, sur la place Gaillon; de là, on irait en fiacre à la gare de Vincennes.
FRENCH   Les créanciers avaient préféré s\'entendre, devant un pareil acharnement du sort.
ENGLISH   Prunaire to little Mdlle.
FRENCH   L\'heure était venue du branle formidable de l\'après-midi, quand la machine surchauffée, menait la danse des clientes et leur tirait l\'argent de la chair.
FRENCH   Vous voyez, je retire le bouton...
ENGLISH    \"But the same thing happened to me,\" repeated Pauline.
FRENCH   Puis, vous additionnerez.
FRENCH   Mouret affectait de ranger des papiers sur son bureau, pour cacher le tremblement de ses mains.
ENGLISH   Then, too, her neighbour, the baker, who never came home till morning, had shown a disposition to annoy her.
ENGLISH    Behind a pile of poplin, Liénard was joking with a tall bare-headed girl, a work-girl of the neigbourhood, sent by her mistress to match some merino.
ENGLISH   You here again found the whiteness of the show windows, but vivified, and burning from one end of the enormous building to the other with the white flame of a fire in full swing.
ENGLISH   And he mentioned his country neighbours, the Lhommes--mother, father, and son--all employed in the infernal shop, people who virtually had no home but were always out and about, leading a hotel, _table d\'hôte_ kind of existence, and never taking a meal at their own place excepting on Sundays.
ENGLISH   If he had closed his doors, there would have been a rising in the street, the despairing cry of worshippers deprived of their confessional and altar! In their still growing passion for luxury, he saw them, notwithstanding the lateness of the hour yet obstinately lingering in the huge iron building, on the suspended staircases and flying bridges.
ENGLISH   \"We don\'t want to influence you.
ENGLISH    Geneviève drew a long breath, and smiled feebly.
ENGLISH   \"As long as you are satisfied, I am as well, darling.\"  Denise\'s affection for them increased on seeing their tenderness.
ENGLISH   But Mouret looked him straight in the face and smiled, from that moment beginning to play the part of an open-hearted young man who was always straightforward in business.
FRENCH   Ce joyeux compère à la barbe d\'un noir d\'encre, ce noceur braillard dont le sang chaud de Gascon empourprait la face, songeait que les femmes du monde n\'étaient guère bonnes, et qu\'elles lâchaient un joli déballage, quand elles osaient vider leur sac.
FRENCH   Alors, plus haut que les faits déjà donnés, au sommet, apparut l\'exploitation de la femme.
FRENCH   À cette approche du crépuscule, une intimité noyait la grande pièce d\'une tiède douceur.
ENGLISH   Had any one ever seen such doings? A draper\'s shop selling everything! Why not call it a bazaar at once? And the employees! a nice set they were too--a lot of puppies, who did their work like porters at a railway station, treating both goods and customers as if they were so many parcels; taking themselves off or getting the sack at a moment\'s notice.
FRENCH   Agir, créer, se battre contre les faits, les vaincre ou être vaincu par eux, toute la joie et toute la santé humaines sont là!  -- Simple façon de s\'étourdir, murmura l\'autre.
FRENCH   Voyez-vous, mon cher, le coup vient de là.
ENGLISH   And inspector Jouve, who, in passing by, had remarked Madame Aurélie\'s tactics, began walking up and down before the pattern-room door, with the regular step of a sentry guarding the will and pleasure of a superior.
FRENCH    Sa petite table en tremblait, disait-il.
ENGLISH   \"But I beg you to let me go, sir, you are torturing me.\"  She was now suffering in her turn.
FRENCH   Mais, bientôt, la fenêtre les attirait, ils s\'y accoudaient, s\'y oubliaient dans des bavardages rieurs, des souvenirs sans fin sur le pays de leur enfance.
FRENCH    -- Monsieur le baron Hartmann, annonça le domestique.
FRENCH    Le soir, Denise songeait ainsi, en regardant ces demoiselles s\'en aller avec leurs amants.
FRENCH   Tant mieux pour le public, voilà tout!  Robineau ne se fâcha pas.
ENGLISH   Mouret assured them that he sold these little trimmings at cost price.
ENGLISH   But why, then, do you repulse me, if you love no one else?\"  A sudden constraint, an anxious bashfulness came upon the young girl.
FRENCH   Lorsque, de son pas tranquille, elle entra sous la haute porte du Bonheur, lorsqu\'ils virent son dos se noyer dans la foule, il y eut en eux comme un arrachement.
FRENCH   Elle retrouva la table ronde, le couvert mis sur une toile cirée, la fenêtre prenant l\'air et la lumière au fond du boyau empesté de la petite cour.
ENGLISH   A few drops had spurted on Favier\'s neighbours, whilst he himself only had his hair slightly wetted: the wine, thrown by an awkward hand, had fallen on the other side of the table.
ENGLISH    \"Monsieur Deloche,\" said she, \"are you coming back with us? Give me your arm.\"  Pauline and Baugé had already gone on in front.
ENGLISH   From that moment she became popular.
FRENCH    Elle se récria de nouveau, elle ne lui laissait plus dire une parole, belle de violence, osant jusqu\'aux larmes de la grande dame outragée.
FRENCH   Mais Gaujean était loin d\'avoir les reins solides de Dumonteil.
ENGLISH   A tawny gold prevailed in the weft of the old carpets, whose faded tints retained still a sombre warmth, like that of an extinguished furnace, a beautiful mellow hue suggestive of the old masters.
ENGLISH   Then, whilst lodging in the Rue Cuvier, he had married the daughter of his doorkeeper, a petty Alsatian tailor, and from that day onward he had bowed submissively before his wife, whose commercial ability filled him with respect.
FRENCH   Comme Marguerite taillait son crayon en attendant les clientes, elle lui dit à voix haute:  -- Vous savez, mon amoureux d\'en face...
ENGLISH   And turning towards Denise, of whose re-engagement he was aware, he said: \"You as well, they\'ve taken you back.
FRENCH   Au-dessus d\'elle, comme s\'il eût regardé la scène, le portrait de Mme Hédouin, dans son cadre d\'or, gardait l\'éternel sourire de ses lèvres peintes.
FRENCH    Elle était toujours charmante, délicate et gaie; mais une grossesse avancée déjà la fatiguait, elle restait plus effarée, plus dépaysée que jamais, dans ces affaires, auxquelles sa nature tendre ne mordait pas, et qui tournaient mal.
ENGLISH   For a long time she continued gazing with a stupid air at the dressing-table, the wardrobe, all the lodginghouse-like bareness.
ENGLISH   Above her, placing herself entirely in her hands, was Madame Desforges, imparting to her face the harsh expression of a mistress exceedingly difficult to please.
FRENCH   Mouret, qui n\'assistait pas à ce conseil, ne put donner son avis que le soir.
ENGLISH   The machine was still roaring, active as ever, letting its steam escape with a last roar, whilst the salesmen folded up the stuffs, and the cashiers counted the receipts.
FRENCH   Oh! que maman ne sache pas!...
ENGLISH   They would see, they would speak to him.
FRENCH    Justement, ce samedi-là, comme un domestique allait l\'introduire dans le grand salon, Mouret aperçut de l\'antichambre, par une porte restée ouverte, Mme Desforges qui traversait le petit salon.
ENGLISH    Baudu had put his elbows on the table, and was wearying her with his fixed stare.
ENGLISH   Pauline, on the contrary, displayed a pretty spring costume in silk, striped white and violet, a feathered bonnet, with bows matching the dress, and jewels about her neck and rings on her fingers, which gave her the appearance of a well-to-do tradesman\'s wife.
FRENCH   Elle restait immobile, attendant la fin de la crise; pendant que Pépé, très las, s\'endormait sur une chaise.
FRENCH    L\'enfant était le grand souci de Denise.
ENGLISH    \"It\'s always like that,\" replied Favier, seating himself on the left.
ENGLISH   Had she no shame in her? a young girl like her to fall in love with such a being! and he even made most atrocious accusations, introducing Hutin\'s name and the names of others into the affair, with such a flood of words, that she could not even defend herself.
FRENCH   Certains soirs, elle faisait dîner Pépé tout seul, d\'une soupe, en lui disant qu\'elle avait mangé dehors; et elle se mettait au lit, la tête bourdonnante, nourrie par la fièvre qui lui brûlait les mains.
FRENCH   Elle dut encore attendre ces dames aux étoffes d\'ameublement, où une cretonne ravissante avait accroché Mme Marty.
FRENCH   Elle s\'approcha, en disant:  -- Vous avez bien raison.
FRENCH   Passez à la caisse!  Enfin, l\'orage éclata un jour sur la tête de Hutin lui-même.
FRENCH   Il avait levé la tête, il la regardait.
ENGLISH   Bouthemont himself, who took a rare delight in all such stories, could not help adding his joke.
ENGLISH   The faces of a few inquisitive salesmen appeared at the plate-glass windows of the Paradise; but the colossus itself preserved the indifference of a machine going at full speed, unconscious of the deaths it may cause on the road.
FRENCH   Retenue depuis le jeudi dans sa chambre, par une entorse prise en montant aux ateliers, elle allait enfin beaucoup mieux; mais, comme Mme Aurélie la gâtait, elle ne se hâtait pas, achevait de se chausser avec peine, résolue cependant à se montrer au rayon.
FRENCH   Voici encore des costumes qu\'il faut me porter là- haut...
FRENCH   Et de là, en moins de dix minutes, elle venait de faire le tour des magasins.
ENGLISH   Pauline, saddened for a moment at the sight of her omelet, which was overdone, recovered her spirits on finding that it tasted fairly well.
FRENCH   Mais, le regardant en face, Mouret se mit à rire; et il joua dès lors le rôle d\'un bon jeune homme, le coeur sur la main, rond en affaires.
FRENCH   Il la traita en effet d\'ingrate, s\'emporta; puis, lorsqu\'elle se défendit, les larmes aux yeux, en lui faisant entendre qu\'elle n\'était pas dupe de ses charités, il s\'attendrit à son tour, bégaya qu\'il avait beaucoup de travaux, qu\'elle l\'abandonnait juste au moment où il allait lancer un parapluie de son invention.
ENGLISH    \"I was sure of it!--But on my honour! never again! A fellow would have to be a regular scamp.\"  And thereupon he ran off, after kissing his sister, like a madman.
FRENCH   Il lui fallut se battre pour se dégager de l\'écrasement obstiné de la porte; on s\'y tuait, au milieu du massacre des soldes.
ENGLISH   This emotion, which she could not analyze, pressed more and more upon her heart like an unbearable weight.
FRENCH    Denise était devenue très rouge, avec son soulier.
ENGLISH   Marguerite went in front, drawing the chair along, like some little vehicle, and slowly opening a passage.
ENGLISH   The latter had followed the scene, and murmured in her ear:  \"My poor child, you mustn\'t be so sensitive.
ENGLISH   However, she sometimes went out for health\'s sake, taking the little one for a long walk, out towards Neuilly; and their treat over there was to drink a cup of milk at a dairyman\'s, who allowed them to sit down in his yard.
FRENCH   Et c\'est lui qui l\'a tuée.
ENGLISH   He, who did not tolerate the slightest peccadillo among the shopwomen, who turned them out for the least caprice, found himself reduced to imploring one of them not to go away, not to abandon him in his misery! He held the door against her, ready to forgive her everything, to shut his eyes, if she merely deigned to lie.
ENGLISH   \"You might have written and I should have told you to stay at Valognes.
FRENCH    -- Alors, c\'est cette fille que vous aimez? dit-elle péniblement, quand ils furent seuls.
ENGLISH   And the time had now arrived, the colossus had outflanked the feeble obstacle, and was investing it with its piles of goods, threatening to swallow it up, absorb it by the sole force of its giant aspiratory powers.
ENGLISH   Others, their first hunger satisfied, talked noisily, always returning to the eternal grievance of the bad food, to the money they had earned, to what they had done on the previous Sunday, and what they were going to do on the next one.
ENGLISH    \"Well! let\'s go in,\" resumed Madame Guibal.
FRENCH   J\'ai promis à mon mari d\'aller voir sa soeur, à Montmartre...
FRENCH   Mon Dieu! comme elle l\'aimait, et quelle douceur elle aurait goûtée à se pendre à son cou, pour rester sur sa poitrine!  -- Je veux, je veux, répétait-il affolé.
FRENCH    -- Mais c\'est Mme Desforges, là-bas! s\'écria la comtesse, les yeux sur un coupé qui s\'arrêtait.
FRENCH   Je vous présente M.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! je n\'en sais rien, monsieur, répondit-elle.
FRENCH   Savait-il donc pourquoi elle traversait la soierie, lorsqu\'elle- même n\'aurait pu expliquer ce qui la poussait à un pareil détour?  Hutin, d\'ailleurs, ne paraissait nullement s\'apercevoir des regards reconnaissants de la jeune fille.
FRENCH   C\'était une éducation à faire, la petite cité phalanstérienne manquait de concorde.
FRENCH   Tandis que tout son être tressaillait et saignait encore, elle trouvait la force de cacher sa torture, sous le masque de sa bonne grâce mondaine.
FRENCH   Elle s\'était affinée, la peau blanche, l\'air délicat et grave.
ENGLISH   And so he was obliged to invent some occupation on the following day when he installed Denise in a corner of his shop.
FRENCH    Elle s\'en alla, elle eut dans le corridor un soupir de profond soulagement.
ENGLISH   Clara was taunted with her troop of lovers; even Marguerite had her child thrown in her teeth, as it were; whilst Madame Frédéric was accused of all sorts of secret passions.
FRENCH   D\'ordinaire, la table était servie pour Baudu, Geneviève et le premier commis.
FRENCH   Le Bonheur, moins artiste, soignait l\'étoffe, vantait ses alpagas et ses mohairs, ses sergés et ses taffetas cuits.
ENGLISH   The latter was quite astonished.
FRENCH   Cependant, Favier, auquel Hutin témoignait une nouvelle condescendance, le regardait en dessous, maigre et froid, la bile au visage, comme s\'il eût compté les bouchées dans ce petit homme trapu, ayant l\'air d\'attendre que le camarade eût mangé Bouthemont, pour le manger ensuite.
FRENCH   Le baron est à nous.
FRENCH   Sur le trottoir de la rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, trois grandes filles en cheveux, l\'air souillon, s\'étaient plantées, collant effrontément leurs visages aux glaces, tâchant de voir la drôle de cuisine qu\'on bâclait là-dedans.
ENGLISH   And she thereupon sought to increase the girl\'s isolation in the department.
FRENCH   Dites, faut-il que je me mette à genoux, pour toucher votre coeur?  Il en était là.
FRENCH   Il fallait en finir, l\'attitude des vendeurs lui avait semblé si menaçante, que le chef du comptoir, pour donner à la direction le temps de prendre un parti, venait d\'envoyer Robineau au réassortiment.
ENGLISH   But it had only just struck six, so she decided to stay in the shop a little longer.
FRENCH   En bas, sous les galeries couvertes, dans les coups de lumière qui venaient de la rue, il remarqua que les clientes commençaient à être plus nombreuses.
FRENCH   Beaucoup, en avalant de grosses bouchées, lisaient un journal, plié et tenu debout contre leur bouteille.
ENGLISH   \"I love her, I love her!\" and it seemed to spread.
ENGLISH   The counter was soon covered with a fortune.
FRENCH    1.E.5.
FRENCH   Comme elle le répétait souvent, pourquoi donc tout ça? ne serait-ce pas plus gentil de vivre tranquille, au fond d\'un petit logement, où l\'on ne mangerait que du pain?  -- Ma chère enfant, reprit-elle avec un sourire qui s\'attristait, nous n\'avons rien à vous cacher...
FRENCH   Vous êtes bien bon pour moi, merci tout de même.
FRENCH   Et, maintenant, voilà Mouret qui devenait son propriétaire: c\'était à lui qu\'il devrait payer! c\'était chez lui, chez ce concurrent abhorré, qu\'il logerait désormais! Une telle pensée achevait de le soulever de fureur.
ENGLISH   The rows of conveyances were now diminishing, six went off at a time, occupying the whole street from one side to the other, amidst the banging of doors, the snapping of whips, and the hum of the passers-by, who swarmed between the wheels.
ENGLISH   He was standing alone, with a sombre countenance, above the millions scattered at his feet.
FRENCH   Et ces dames, la mère et la fille, très serrées d\'argent par celui-ci, que des coups de tendresse continuaient à dévorer au-dehors, en étaient parfois réduites à refaire leurs robes elles-mêmes.
ENGLISH    \"What fun they\'re having, eh?\" said Pauline, very busy with a plate of stewed eels, which she declared extraordinary.
FRENCH    Cependant, l\'éventail faisait le tour de ces dames.
ENGLISH    However Denise\'s entry reconciled these young ladies.
FRENCH   Enfin, le mal est fait, je voulais seulement vous apprendre que tout le monde, chez nous, connaît aujourd\'hui votre tendresse pour vos frères...
FRENCH   Partez donc, laissez-moi seul.
FRENCH   Son coeur bondissait, sous l\'humiliation de son amour; et il aimait Denise davantage, d\'une tendresse émue, devant le beau silence qu\'elle gardait.
ENGLISH   Mouret was saying to her in a low and trembling voice: \"Listen, Denise, I love you.
FRENCH    -- Avec ça, j\'ai une faim! murmura-t-il.
ENGLISH   And as behind the cravat department there was a staircase leading to the basement, she hastily pushed her brother, and made him go down.
FRENCH   Elle continuait de tirer son aiguille, pendant que le vieillard lâchait d\'autres phrases entrecoupées, entre deux entailles de son canif: ça commençait à peine, on verrait plus tard des choses extraordinaires, il avait des idées qui balayeraient leur comptoir de parapluies; et, au fond de son obstination, grondait la révolte du petit fabricant personnel, contre l\'envahissement banal des articles de bazar.
ENGLISH   However, when she plainly questioned her visitor, he appeared more embarrassed than ever.
FRENCH   Pépé s\'était imaginé que l\'oncle se fâchait: il avait fallu le calmer, en lui donnant tout de suite du dessert, des biscuits qui se trouvaient devant son assiette.
FRENCH    -- Vous avez une sale figure, vous! finit-il par dire un jour à un pauvre diable dont le nez de travers l\'agaçait.
ENGLISH   The doctor had still not arrived.
FRENCH    L\'autre, surprise, regarda Clara, puis reporta les yeux sur Denise, en répondant:  -- Mais non, pas la grande, la petite!  Et, comme Mme Marty n\'osait plus rien affirmer, Mme Desforges ajouta à voix plus haute, avec un mépris de dame pour des femmes de chambre:  -- Peut-être la petite et la grande, toutes celles qui veulent!  Denise avait entendu.
ENGLISH   She must be the wife of a stockbroker or a doctor, or something of that sort.\"  \"Don\'t tell me! All the women get themselves up so much alike now-a-days that it\'s impossible to tell what they are!\"  Favier glanced at his debit book.
FRENCH   Sa robe de soie n\'était plus trop large, serrant sa taille ronde, moulant les lignes pures de ses épaules de vierge; et, si sa chevelure, nouée en grosses tresses, restait sauvage, elle tâchait du moins de se contenir.
FRENCH    Mouret s\'était levé vivement, en homme désolé de s\'oublier ainsi.
ENGLISH   Ah! if I were not so old and worn out!\"  A long silence ensued.
ENGLISH   But after a while she raised her head with difficulty, and looked at the sympathizing face bent over hers.
ENGLISH   No doubt she was aware of much that was going on.
ENGLISH   A library was also formed, ten thousand volumes were placed at the disposal of the employees.
FRENCH   Il va vous dire que toutes les vieilles familles de France devraient se mettre à vendre du calicot.
ENGLISH   He was already entering the shop with an air of indifference, while she remained motionless, quite upset by that glance of his, filled indeed with a singular emotion, in which there was more uneasiness than pleasure.
FRENCH   Depuis le matin, dans le coup de fièvre de la vente, on ne causait que de cette aventure.
FRENCH    Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
ENGLISH   A jolly good riddance! Such clean sweeps made room for others! Deloche and Pauline were the only ones who when they met amidst the crush of the galleries exchanged distressful words, in their regret at the departure of Denise, so virtuous and gentle.
FRENCH   Hutin et lui, si liés au magasin, se saluaient à la porte et ne se parlaient plus; beaucoup de vendeurs, en continuel contact, devenaient ainsi des étrangers, ignorant leurs vies, dès qu\'ils mettaient le pied dans la rue.
ENGLISH   In the mercery and glove departments she nearly trod on some more assistants, and only felt safe when she at last found herself on the staircase.
ENGLISH   She turned round and recognised the tall, awkward young fellow who had spoken to her in the morning.
FRENCH   Et cela réglé, organisé avec une rigueur mécanique, tout un peuple de femmes passant dans la force et la logique des engrenages.
FRENCH   Certainement, il s\'agissait d\'un autre article.
FRENCH    -- Oh! répondit-elle, en affectant de plaisanter à son tour, c\'est toujours l\'agneau qui finit par manger le loup.
ENGLISH   And for seventy thousand francs he had to part with what had cost him more than two hundred thousand, considering himself fortunate even in meeting the Lhommes, his neighbours, who were desirous of adding to their property.
ENGLISH   She\'ll be a little help to you.\"  Then he continued his inspection, in despair.
FRENCH   Voyez-vous, c\'est une souffrance que je ne connaissais pas.
ENGLISH    \"Make haste! it\'s intolerable!\" cried Hutin to Favier, when he returned from showing his customer to the pay-desk.
FRENCH   Celui-ci salua ces dames, regarda le jeune homme de l\'air fin qui éclairait par moments sa grosse figure alsacienne.
FRENCH   Toutes n\'en ont pas, de ces crinières!  Et elle retourna à la lingerie, laissant les deux autres gênées.
FRENCH    -- Pourvu que je joigne les deux bouts, je me moque du reste, reprenait celui-ci, en attaquant délicatement la langue de la pointe de son canif.
FRENCH    D\'ailleurs, Denise vivait toujours dans le branle du Bonheur des Dames.
FRENCH    C\'était mieux qu\'un chef de rayon, c\'était Octave Mouret en personne.
FRENCH   Il courait de maison en maison, au milieu de cris de surprise et de colère.
ENGLISH   \"But it\'s too narrow across the chest, and it forms a ruck at the back between the shoulders.\" Then, in her sharpest voice, she added: \"It\'s no use for you to stand looking at me, mademoiselle, that won\'t make it any better! Try and find a remedy.
FRENCH    Il fallut aller jusqu\'au boulevard.
FRENCH   Chacun casait son chapeau et son pardessus, en étouffant un bâillement, la mine blanche encore de sommeil.
FRENCH   Puis, venaient les voleuses par manie, une perversion du désir, une névrose nouvelle qu\'un aliéniste avait classée, en y constatant le résultat aigu de la tension exercée par les grands magasins.
FRENCH    -- Fichtre! dit Jean.
FRENCH   Mais il ne se mêla pas d\'abord de la vente, il avait souri à Denise, et se tenait debout, en regardant Mme Bourdelais.
ENGLISH   He had a girl\'s beauty--a beauty which he seemed to have stolen from his sister--a fair white skin, ruddy curly hair, lips and eyes overflowing with tenderness.
ENGLISH   A mere wall separated her room from her old department; and, from early morning, she lived her old days afresh, divining and hearing the arrival of the crowd and the increasing bustle of business.
ENGLISH   For his part he had studied law by a sort of family tradition; and had then remained a burden on his widowed mother, who already hardly knew how to dispose of her two daughters.
ENGLISH   He himself relapsed into a pale consternation; and they all remained with their eyes fixed on the monster, attracted, possessed, glutting themselves with thoughts of their misfortune.
ENGLISH   And gradually all the customers were decorated in this way, the building was filling with these white bridal flowers, every woman diffusing as she passed a penetrating perfume of violets.
ENGLISH   \"Yes, it\'s nice, very nice! If you think I\'m going to stand this sort of thing you\'re mistaken.\"  And with this remark he pursued her whilst she was returning to the shop, overcome with emotion and unable to find a word of defence.
ENGLISH   Everything then beamed in her white face, her soft eyes, her cheeks and chin full of dimples; whilst her heavy blonde hair also seemed to light up with a royal and conquering beauty.
ENGLISH   He blew his nose to recover himself a bit, and then asked, \"You don\'t say anything?\"  But Colomban had nothing to say.
FRENCH    Le jeune homme laissa échapper un geste nerveux.
ENGLISH    \"Are you feeling better, uncle?\" asked Denise.
FRENCH   Tiens! Bédoré et soeur, la bonneterie de la rue Gaillon, a déjà perdu la moitié de sa clientèle.
FRENCH   Quand le vendeur put s\'approcher, après avoir débité sa vente d\'un trait de crayon sur son cahier à souches, il appela cette vente, que le caissier inscrivit au registre; puis, il y eut un contre-appel, et la feuille détachée du cahier fut embrochée dans une pique de fer, près du timbre aux acquits.
FRENCH   Aussi voulut-il fêter la pose de la première pierre.
FRENCH    Elle le regardait, elle songeait qu\'il ne devait rien savoir, pour l\'employer ainsi auprès du baron, en affectant de le considérer simplement comme un vieil ami à elle.
FRENCH    Il se tut, frémissant; et, comme le jeune homme demeurait toujours la tête basse, il lui demanda pour la troisième fois, au bout d\'un silence pénible:  -- Tu ne dis rien?  Enfin, sans le regarder, Colomban répondit:  -- Il n\'y a rien à dire...
ENGLISH   The night was coming on, but still he recognised her clearly.
FRENCH   C\'est insupportable...
ENGLISH   Moreover for the last three months he had been leading a terribly dissipated life, squandering his money in costly and stupid caprices, with a prodigality which caused many remarks.
ENGLISH   I don\'t need anything.
FRENCH   Au brusque mouvement que fit la jeune fille pour lui échapper, il la regarda.
ENGLISH    \"Well! there\'s the governor laughing now!\" resumed Favier, in astonishment, as the group again passed the door.
ENGLISH   On perceiving her friends, she came up with a gay, smiling air, concealing her defeat beneath the fashionable ease of her manner.
FRENCH   Baudu et Colomban allèrent causer avec un courtier, qui venait prendre des ordres.
ENGLISH   Denise had thrown herself back on the sofa, her head against the woodwork and shaken by a fresh flood of sobs, which she stifled in her handkerchief.
FRENCH   Elle leur semblait emporter leur fortune.
FRENCH   Mais, soyez tranquille, tout le monde ne les déteste pas.
FRENCH   Du matin au soir, le long de la rue du Dix-Décembre, ouverte depuis peu, stationnait une foule de badauds, le nez en l\'air, ne voyant rien, mais préoccupés des merveilles qu\'on se racontait de cette façade dont l\'inauguration allait révolutionner Paris.
FRENCH   Mme Bourdelais, après avoir suivi l\'achat d\'un regard de blâme, lui dit amicalement:  -- Vous avez bien tort de vous presser.
FRENCH    Mais un bruit de pas, au bout du corridor, les inquiéta.
FRENCH   Pour contenir la clientèle altérée, on avait dû établir une queue, ainsi qu\'aux portes des théâtres, à l\'aide d\'une barrière recouverte de velours.
FRENCH    -- Mais c\'est une pitié! Ah! mon pauvre vieux, ça me fait de la peine pour toi...
ENGLISH    In their superb isolation the four frontages now ran along the four streets, without a break.
ENGLISH    She replied \"No,\" with a shake of the head.
FRENCH    -- Comment! c\'est toi! qu\'y a-t-il donc?  Son frère Jean, les mains embarrassées d\'un paquet, se trouvait devant elle.
FRENCH   Ah! c\'est fini, c\'est fini...
ENGLISH   And so at the millinery counter installed in a new room on the first-floor she had spent an hour in having the cupboards emptied, taking the bonnets off the stands ranged on a couple of tables, and trying all of them, white hats, white bonnets and white togues, on herself and her daughter.
FRENCH   Il aboutirait à une catastrophe, Gaujean l\'avait écrasé d\'une affaire trop lourde, où tous deux resteraient.
ENGLISH   No doubt they were speaking of Denise, for they both stopped talking to bow to her with a ceremonious air.
ENGLISH   This gave her a pretext for stopping, and she talked on for a moment, trying to find a means of breaking the terrible news.
ENGLISH    \"Ah, at last!\" said she, heaving a sigh.
FRENCH    Cependant, Denise, le coeur crevé de commisération, la regardait.
ENGLISH   \"Enjoy yourself, my dear fellow.
FRENCH   L\'inspecteur dut obéir, très contrarié de se compromettre dans une pareille affaire.
ENGLISH    The men\'s dining-room was now an immense apartment, supplying ample room for five hundred people at each repast.
FRENCH   Un bec de gaz éclairait la petite salle à manger, où s\'étouffait l\'odeur de la nourriture.
ENGLISH    \"No--this way, mademoiselle, if you please,\" said he.
FRENCH   Ses mains tremblaient, elle suppliait en riant Mme Desforges de l\'empêcher de dépenser davantage, lorsque la rencontre de Mme Guibal lui apporta une excuse.
FRENCH   De gros hommes lisaient, renversés, étalant des ventres, sans avoir l\'idée aimable de céder la place.
ENGLISH   Deloche left them on the Place de la Bastille; like all young probationers, he slept in the house, and had to be back by eleven o\'clock.
ENGLISH   The spectators were especially astonished by the central entrance which was also decorated with a profusion of mosaics, faience, and terra-cotta, and surmounted by a freshly gilt allegorical group, which glittered in the sun: Woman garmented and kissed by a flight of laughing cupids.
FRENCH   Mais alors pourquoi me repoussez-vous, si vous n\'aimez personne?  Une gêne soudaine, une pudeur inquiète s\'empara de la jeune fille.
ENGLISH    He only stopped for a second and then started off again, going from the pay-desk to an obscure corner.
FRENCH    Mais il s\'arrêta, et Denise en se tournant pour voir ce qui l\'intimidait, aperçut Mouret debout derrière eux.
ENGLISH   A sum of three thousand francs, held in reserve by Bourras as a last resource, was swallowed up in this way.
FRENCH   C\'était le mariage à bref délai.
ENGLISH   Behind them ran other counters, also littered with goods which a small army of shopmen was examining.
ENGLISH   Wasn\'t it enough that they should grip him on all sides, on the right, the left, and behind, without attacking him underfoot as well, taking the very ground from under him! And he drove the masons away, and went to law.
ENGLISH   Then he continued in a lower voice, \"Shall I tell you? Well, there are moments when I feel myself the most culpable of all in our misfortune.
FRENCH   Ce fut un samedi que tomba l\'enterrement, par un temps noir, un ciel de suie qui pesait sur la ville frissonnante.
ENGLISH   The disaster spread, one could hear the oldest houses cracking.
ENGLISH   \"I don\'t want to know,\" she replied.
ENGLISH   At last the scandal was stifled out of regard for Madame Aurélie, whom Mouret himself treated with deference.
FRENCH   Vous savez que cette fille doit être ici à cinq heures...
ENGLISH   The young person can fold her arms.\"  \"Oh! easily,\" replied Denise, who continued to smile amiably.
ENGLISH    Denise was so menaced amid this general clearance, that she lived in constant expectation of a catastrophe.
FRENCH    -- C\'est bien, monsieur, s\'il faut que je souffre chez moi les insolences de vos maîtresses!...
FRENCH    Et elle jetait à Mouret le regard moqueur d\'une Parisienne, que l\'attifement ridicule d\'une provinciale égayait.
ENGLISH   But they are always occupied.\"  On the second floor the light increased, illumining with a raw pallor the distressful aspect of the house.
ENGLISH   Perhaps too he was stricken with remorse at not having assisted her during the time of misery through which she had lately passed.
ENGLISH   She turned about, went to look at the machine knives, furious with her husband for not inventing a pretext for calling her.
ENGLISH   On the oval table, in the middle of the apartment, the fifteen places were set further apart and the wine was in decanters, a dish of skate and a dish of beef with pungent sauce occupying the two ends of the table.
ENGLISH    \"I would with pleasure, sir,\" she at last replied.
FRENCH   Réduite au silence, elle l\'écouta longtemps, elle se retira, l\'âme pleine de trouble.
FRENCH   Je suis lasse de faire recoller les miens.
FRENCH    Il s\'interrompit, il cria:  -- Poult de soie blanc, trente-cinq mètres, à huit francs soixante-quinze!  -- Ah! enfin! murmura Bouthemont soulagé.
ENGLISH   But what most attracted the throng was a Swiss chalet in the glove department, a chalet made entirely of gloves, Mignot\'s _chef d\'œuvre_ which it had taken him two days to arrange.
ENGLISH   \"However, I shall feel quite easy with you, for you are like me, you can\'t be very fond of them.
ENGLISH   \"I\'ll take you away at the holidays.
FRENCH   Cependant, Robineau tenait bon, et c\'était maintenant une bataille de chaque heure.
FRENCH    Il sourit, il essaya de lui prendre une main, qu\'elle retira.
ENGLISH   No, he was honest, he belonged to the family, he didn\'t speculate on the business as though he were a stock-jobber.
ENGLISH   Between two mouthfuls, with his voice still thick, each made some remark, adding a detail; and only the obstinate readers remained mute, with their noses buried in their newspapers.
FRENCH   Puis, il est devenu de quatre millions, a passé dix fois et a produit quarante millions d\'affaires.
FRENCH   On n\'entendait que la plume de Mouret.
FRENCH    Cependant, Mouret avait ouvert la porte.
FRENCH    Puis, il bégaya:  -- Je l\'aime.
FRENCH   Nous allons risquer le tout pour le tout.
ENGLISH   Since the shops lowered their prices, it was simply a question of waiting.
ENGLISH   But she still had no plan, for she stopped at the corner of the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Champs, into which she finally turned, after looking around her with an undecided air.
ENGLISH   Then, in reply to his brief questions, Bourdoncle gave him various information respecting of the great sale of winter novelties, which was to commence on the following Monday.
FRENCH   Alors, la jeune fille conçut la bonne pensée de partir en avant, afin de préparer Mme Robineau à ce coup affreux.
FRENCH   Aussi Bourdoncle ne pouvait-il la voir, avec ses yeux clairs, son visage doux, toute son attitude simple, sans être pris maintenant d\'une peur véritable, comme s\'il avait eu, en face de lui, une mangeuse de chair déguisée, l\'énigme sombre de la femme, la mort sous les traits d\'une vierge.
FRENCH   Aussi, par gratitude d\'homme adoré, crut-il devoir railler à son tour, malgré la bienveillance qu\'il éprouvait pour Denise, dont sa nature galante subissait le charme secret.
ENGLISH   She was perfectly well aware that Geneviève referred to Colomban and Clara; but she pretended to be surprised.
ENGLISH   There was no illusion possible; if they dismissed any one from her department it would certainly be herself.
FRENCH   J\'ai marié l\'aîné, et sa femme me l\'envoie, pour des emplettes.
FRENCH   Cependant, il prit la protégée de Mme Desforges, il la mit seulement au service des échantillons, comme il avait déjà casé, pour être agréable à des amis, deux comtesses et une baronne au service de la publicité, où elles faisaient des bandes et des enveloppes.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s quite enough to have to pay.\"  The baron looked at him for a moment without speaking.
FRENCH   Je viens encore de faire un Rouen, cette tuile ne m\'a rien acheté.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien? demanda vivement Pauline à Denise, en la prenant à part, quand ils furent devant la station.
FRENCH   Encore une bonne journée, on tapait derrière le mur, la soierie avait dû faire dix mille francs; ou bien, il se gaudissait, le mur était resté froid, un coup de pluie avait tué la recette.
ENGLISH   We are people of more liberal minds, and if he can\'t find employment for his niece in his house, why we will show him that she has only had to knock at our door to be received.
ENGLISH   Then silently she presented her lips, pressed them to his, and whispered: \"Remember they\'re waiting for me.
ENGLISH   He had often felt the force of the new style of business, the evolution which the young girl spoke about; and in his clear, quiet moments he would ask himself why he should try to resist such a powerful current, which must carry everything before it.
FRENCH    Le rayon avait exposé ses vêtements de couleur tendre, des jaquettes et des mantilles d\'été, en soie légère, en lainage de fantaisie.
FRENCH   Si nous sommes battus, eh bien! ça nous enterrera...
FRENCH   Maintenant, Denise les entendait plaisanter, quand ils passaient près d\'elle, en lui jetant un coup d\'oeil oblique.
FRENCH   Joseph, sous les yeux rieurs de ces demoiselles, écrivait de travers, Clara, enchantée de cette aide qui lui arrivait, la bousculait pourtant, dans la haine qu\'elle avait de toutes les femmes, au magasin.
FRENCH   Dans les lointains, au delà de coulées d\'ombre, il y avait des comptoirs perdus, éclatants, grouillant d\'une cohue blonde de soleil.
FRENCH   Ah! si elle avait vécu, les choses tourneraient autrement.
ENGLISH   Thus, a sharp, sour feeling was springing up in the honest old tradesman\'s breast.
FRENCH   Qu\'avait-elle au coeur, pour qu\'une flamme pareille lui fût montée dans la poitrine?  -- Mon Dieu! non, répondit-elle.
FRENCH    INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
FRENCH   Pourtant, il se contenait, il reprit de son air de patron obligeant qui s\'intéresse simplement à une de ses demoiselles:  -- Voyons, si je vous priais...
ENGLISH    But Vinçard, affecting extreme sorrow, cut him short: \"How unfortunate!\" said he.
FRENCH   Elle paraissait toute remuée par la délicatesse du chiffre, comme envahie d\'un désir dont l\'émotion pâlissait son regard.
ENGLISH   From morning to night, the knives were cutting silk, wool, and linen, with a scythe-like noise.
ENGLISH   On the other hand Marguerite Vadon, born at Grenoble, where her parents kept a linen shop, had been obliged to come to Paris, where she had entered The Ladies\' Paradise, in order to conceal a misfortune due to her frailty.
ENGLISH   At Denise\'s counter was a crowd of mothers with bands of little girls and boys, swamped beneath the garments they were trying on.
FRENCH   Mais elle n\'osa le gronder, tellement il paraissait hors de lui, sans casquette, essoufflé d\'être venu en courant du faubourg du Temple.
ENGLISH   The sun was setting and they were returning towards Joinville, when they saw two boats coming down stream at a racing speed, their crews meantime exchanging volleys of insults, in which the repeated cries of \"Sawbones!\" and \"Counter-jumpers!\" predominated.
FRENCH    Mais c\'était surtout pendant son inspection quotidienne des magasins, qu\'il sentait sa misère.
FRENCH   Mon Dieu! que de tortures! des familles qui pleurent, des vieillards jetés au pavé, tous les drames poignants de la ruine! Et elle ne pouvait sauver personne, et elle avait conscience que cela était bon, qu\'il fallait ce fumier de misères à la santé du Paris de demain.
ENGLISH   heels.
ENGLISH    \"Do look there!\" exclaimed Madame de Boves, standing motionless, her eyes in the air.
FRENCH   La foule entourait le blessé, un sergent de ville se trouvait là par hasard.
FRENCH   On avait vidé les palais, dévalisé les mosquées et les bazars.
ENGLISH   Monsieur de Boves meanwhile had manœuvred so as to get near Madame Guibal, whom he ultimately followed, for the second time trying to lose Vallagnosc; but the latter, weary of the crush, hastened to rejoin him.
ENGLISH   Thus, Hutin was wild at the thought of the three francs pocketed so easily by a salesman whom he considered his inferior in business-talent.
FRENCH   C\'était très fort.
FRENCH   Les autres restaient alanguis, devant la table encombrée de vaisselle grasse.
ENGLISH   I cannot bring you those children, can I?\"  \"They shall be my brothers, too.
FRENCH   Vraiment, ces disparitions continuelles ne pouvaient se tolérer davantage.
ENGLISH    Deloche, however, seated between Baugé and Liénard, found himself nearly opposite Favier.
ENGLISH    But with eager, outstretched hands Pépé repeated: \"Give it me, sir, give it me!\"  The dog\'s head was finished and Bourras held it at a distance, then examined it closely with noisy glee.
FRENCH   Et il restait là, sans s\'essuyer, étranglé de colère, devant une brutalité pareille.
FRENCH    -- Ce serait avec plaisir, monsieur, répondit-elle enfin.
ENGLISH   It was Mouret; no one had mentioned his name, but he revealed himself, and she guessed who he was, and understood why the sight of him had caused her such emotion in the street, in the silk department, and again here.
FRENCH    -- Passez à la caisse!  La terrible phrase sonna très haut, dans le rayon alors vide de clientes.
FRENCH   Elle n\'a jamais eu de l\'amitié que pour un homme: oui, pour M.
FRENCH   Et elle, si mince, l\'air si fragile, résista, pendant que beaucoup de vendeuses devaient quitter les nouveautés, atteintes de maladies spéciales.
FRENCH   Je ne savais plus, jamais ma femme de chambre ne l\'aurait trouvé.
ENGLISH   There was a silence, during which the two men remained face to face, looking very serious.
FRENCH   Et, dans cette amabilité générale, elle n\'était un peu blessée que par la tristesse singulière de Deloche et les sourires inexplicables de Pauline.
FRENCH   Une honte la torturait à cette idée, une angoisse dont elle n\'avait jamais encore senti l\'étreinte.
ENGLISH   Ah, it\'s all over, it\'s all over.\"  And she cast a dim glance round the dark shop, as if she felt that her daughter and The Old Elbeuf were disappearing together.
ENGLISH   Nearly all the saleswomen, by their daily contact with rich customers, acquired certain graces, and finished by forming a vague nameless class--something between a work-girl and a middle-class lady.
FRENCH   On ne gardait pas ses morts, il fallait bien les enterrer; et, d\'un geste, il envoyait dans la terre, il balayait et jetait à la fosse commune le cadavre de l\'antique négoce, dont les restes verdis et empestés devenaient la honte des rues ensoleillées du nouveau Paris.
FRENCH   Eh bien! à tout à l\'heure.
ENGLISH   However, he now made three thousand five hundred francs a year at the Bon Marché.
FRENCH   Mme Desforges avait retrouvé tous ses articles à la caisse 10.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s a lie, it\'s a lie, I tell you!\" And in the emotion agitating him, he had added a confession, entirely opening his heart in a stammering voice.
FRENCH   Ce fut Marguerite qui eut l\'intelligence de demander un renseignement.
FRENCH   Toute une queue de commis grossissait, il y avait des rires, des poussées.
ENGLISH   \"Shut the window if you like,\" he replied at last.
ENGLISH   This was the fourth fellow of genius that she had confided to him, and he was beginning to feel ridiculous.
ENGLISH   Her daughter Valentine was already examining it.
FRENCH    Au rez-de-chaussée, dans le magasin, Mouret alla droit à la caisse 10, où Albert Lhomme se polissait les ongles, en attendant la clientèle.
ENGLISH   And thus her white cheeks slowly coloured with a flush.
FRENCH   Vous nous faites mourir.
FRENCH   Mais, quand elle eut monté l\'escalier, Henriette ne trouva plus Mouret, qui venait de plonger Vallagnosc en pleine foule, pour achever de l\'étourdir, et pris lui-même du besoin physique de ce bain du succès.
ENGLISH    Mouret did not at once reply; he was walking about from the window to the door, seeking to stifle his violent emotion.
ENGLISH    \"But why don\'t all the manufacturers come to an understanding together?\" resumed Robineau, violently.
FRENCH   Un flacon de verveine, qu\'on avait oublié de reboucher, exhalait une odeur vague et perdue de bouquet qui se fane.
FRENCH    Vallagnosc se renversait mollement sur le canapé.
FRENCH    -- Non, elle va bien, reprit-elle.
FRENCH   Mais, tout d\'un coup, il se remit à sourire: il venait d\'apercevoir Mme Desforges et Mme Guibal traversant le rayon avec lenteur.
FRENCH    -- Si encore l\'une de ces deux chambres était libre! reprit Bourras.
FRENCH    -- Si vous l\'aimez tant, il peut vous revenir encore, continua la jeune fille, pour endormir la mourante dans ce dernier espoir.
ENGLISH   This came as a great relief.
ENGLISH   He knew, then, that she had ever remained virtuous! Both remained silent; he still lingered beside her, regulating his walk to the child\'s short steps; and the distant murmurs of the city died away under the black shadows of the spreading chestnut-trees.
ENGLISH   The muslin, the gauze, the art-guipures flowed in light ripples, whilst very richly embroidered tulles, and pieces of oriental silver-worked silk served as a background to this giant decoration, which partook both of the tabernacle and the alcove.
FRENCH   Deloche, cédant à un mouvement irrésistible, venait de lui jeter son dernier verre de vin par la figure, en bégayant:  -- Tiens! sale menteur, j\'aurais dû t\'arroser hier!  Ce fut un esclandre.
FRENCH    En effet, Baugé, qui avait quitté depuis peu le Bon Marché pour le Bonheur des Dames, allait l\'épouser, vers le milieu du mois.
FRENCH   C\'était la première qui ne cédait pas.
FRENCH   Le capital peut passer quinze fois, voici longtemps que je le prédis.
ENGLISH   In the depths of the galleries you now only heard the lingering calls of a few men clearing a last shelf.
ENGLISH   Come in, that\'ll be better than gaping at a parcel of rubbish.\"  And after addressing a last pout of anger to The Ladies\' Paradise, he made way for the children by entering the shop and calling his wife and daughter: \"Elizabeth, Geneviève, come down; here\'s company for you!\"  Denise and the two boys, however, hesitated at sight of the darkness of the shop.
FRENCH   Mais il ne la distinguait même pas dans la cohue, il était encore avec Vallagnosc, occupé à lui montrer la maison, la face rayonnante de triomphe.
ENGLISH   During the first few days she did not dare to raise her head, uneasy at feeling him near her, with his lion-like mane, hooked nose, and piercing eyes, shaded by bushy brows.
ENGLISH   But he did not directly refuse, the idea of starting a competitor to The Ladies\' Paradise even pleased him somewhat; for in banking matters he had already invented this sort of competition, to keep off others.
FRENCH   Et il les écoutait d\'une oreille, pendant que le jeune homme, enflammé du désir de le convaincre, se livrait davantage, lui expliquait le mécanisme du nouveau commerce des nouveautés.
FRENCH   Le comptoir avait fini par découvrir son amitié avec Pauline, et il voyait une bravade dans cette affection donnée à une vendeuse d\'un comptoir ennemi.
ENGLISH   Before a fortnight passed, the opening would leave in both these streets a great gap full of sunlight and uproar.
ENGLISH   \"Look at Monsieur Bourdoncle, he\'s always watching me, trying to find me in fault just as if I were in his way.
ENGLISH   It was Mouret, who had dined on the other side of the river and was hurrying along on foot to call on Madame Desforges.
FRENCH    -- Vous savez qu\'il a écrit à mon propriétaire pour acheter la maison, dit Bourras en regardant fixement le drapier de ses yeux de flamme.
ENGLISH   There was not a cloud in the sky; all was gay in the blue air, transparent as crystal.
FRENCH   Tout le rayon attendait, flairant une catastrophe.
FRENCH   J\'aurais été sûre.
ENGLISH   The two saleswomen, delighted to have set their two superiors at variance, had returned to their work with an air of profound indifference.
ENGLISH   Forgive me, I beg of you.\"  He resumed his walk and again his step resounded amidst the funereal emptiness of the house.
ENGLISH   We\'ll do the cooking together.\" And then as she refused the offer fearing that it might inconvenience him, he thundered out: \"Great heavens! have you no confidence in me? I shan\'t eat your child!\"  Denise was much happier at Robineau\'s.
ENGLISH   However, Baudu still went on, louder than ever, accusing the people opposite--that pack of savages who murdered each other in their struggle for existence--of even destroying all family ties.
FRENCH   Le jeune ménage devait accompagner Denise à Valognes: un vrai voyage de noces, un mois de vacances dans les souvenirs d\'autrefois.
FRENCH    -- Comment! tu pars déjà? reprit Mme Desforges.
ENGLISH   For three years Mouret had been waiting for this work--first, in the expectation of an increase of his own business; secondly, for the furtherance of certain schemes of enlargement which he dared not openly avow, so extensive were his ideas.
FRENCH   Pour la partie de Rambouillet, Mme Aurélie déclara simplement que les convenances empêchaient Albert d\'en être, et que le père lui-même montrerait du tact en refusant de venir; ce dont les deux hommes furent enchantés.
FRENCH   Ce fut pour elle une surprise: quelques instants avaient suffi, la chaussée était trouée de flaques, les ruisseaux roulaient des eaux sales, une boue épaisse, piétinée, poissait les trottoirs; et, sous l\'averse battante, on ne voyait plus que le défilé confus des parapluies, se bousculant, se ballonnant, pareils à de grandes ailes sombres, dans les ténèbres.
ENGLISH   Yes, he has sworn to give long credits to the little houses rather than accept my prices.\"  Mouret shrugged his shoulders.
FRENCH   Il avait passé par les différentes étapes, petit commis, vendeur appointé, admis enfin aux confidences et aux plaisirs de la famille, le tout patiemment, menant une vie d\'horloge, regardant Geneviève comme une affaire excellente et honnête.
FRENCH   Non, elle a l\'air trop comme il faut.
ENGLISH   He, exaggerating the coarse good-nature of his face, seemed to be concealing, behind his drooping eyelashes, the inward flame which was consuming him; whilst she, her head bowed lower beneath her heavy hair, appeared to be giving way entirely, as if a prey to some secret grief.
ENGLISH   The old man had slipped up there in the dark, to feast his eyes on that triumphant show; and so great was his grief that he was unconscious of the rain beating down on his bare head, and streaming off his long white hair.
FRENCH    Il était dans une heure de découragement.
FRENCH   Mais il ne se fâchait point, il la regardait de son air à la fois paternel et curieux.
FRENCH    Mais il se précipita devant la porte.
ENGLISH    \"You saw her, then? You were looking on?\" he murmured, chilled to feel that she had been a sort of accomplice.
FRENCH   Il avait, de ses lèvres minces, un terrible: «Passez à la caisse!» qui tombait comme un coup de hache.
ENGLISH    Denise was pale with emotion.
FRENCH   L\'une avait violemment retiré le manteau pour le jeter sur une chaise; tandis que l\'autre lançait au hasard sur la toilette les quelques épingles qui lui restaient entre les doigts.
ENGLISH   They had closed the doors and people halted on the pavement, looking through the windows in astonishment that the shop should be shut when such extraordinary activity prevailed inside.
ENGLISH   \"His nose is always turning towards the under-linen department.\"  They had requisitioned Mademoiselle de Fontenailles there, and she was assisting at the trousseau counter.
FRENCH   Puis, à demi-voix, il remâcha ses douleurs, ne nommant personne, ne s\'adressant à personne.
ENGLISH    \"Really,\" he murmured at last, \"you think the Paris Delight thicker?\"  \"Oh! a hundred times!\" said Madame de Boves.
FRENCH   Quand elle eut juré qu\'on l\'avait baissé de prix deux fois, que de cent cinquante on l\'avait mis à cent trente, et qu\'il était maintenant à cent dix, Mme Marty fut sans force contre la tentation du bon marché.
FRENCH    -- Hein? c\'est prodigieux, cet étalage! On en rêve...
FRENCH    Pendant quelques secondes, elle demeura muette, toute blanche.
FRENCH   Est-ce qu\'ils croient qu\'ils me feraient commettre une coquinerie, avec leur argent?...
ENGLISH    \"What nonsense, mademoiselle! It fits worse than ever.
ENGLISH   A group of idlers was constantly forming there, and desire arose from the admiration of the throng.
ENGLISH   Her cousin tried to prevent her from drinking.
ENGLISH   They advanced but slowly, squeezed almost to death, and maintained upright by the shoulders around them; and their desires already derived enjoyment from this painful entrance which heightened their curiosity.
FRENCH   Calicot, mon vieux!  Mouret avait relevé la tête, et il lui tapa de nouveau sur le genou, il répéta avec la gaieté solide d\'un gaillard sans honte pour le métier qui l\'enrichissait:  -- Calicot, en plein!...
ENGLISH   Never had Denise suffered so much in the department, and she now gave up all hope of conquering it.
ENGLISH   It\'s obvious!\" She kissed her affectionately on the cheek and then asked her: \"You will go this evening, of course?\"  Denise looked at her without replying and all at once burst into tears, letting her head fall on Pauline\'s shoulder.
FRENCH   Maintenant, je reconnais la demoiselle...
ENGLISH   For a long time a mere commission agent, it was only during the last five or six years that he had possessed looms of his own, and he still had a lot of his work done by piece-workers, furnishing them with the raw material and paying them by the yard.
ENGLISH   There, on a level with the pavement, was a kind of glazed cage, into which the vans discharged the goods.
ENGLISH   Coffee was taken by all excepting Denise, who couldn\'t bear it, she said.
ENGLISH       CHAPTER XI.
ENGLISH   He pictured me in the street in tatters, begging--me whom he loved so dearly, whom he longed to see rich and happy.\" The poor woman paused; on turning her head she saw that her husband had opened his eyes; then she continued stammering: \"My darling, why have you done this? You must think me very wicked! I assure you, I don\'t care if we are ruined.
ENGLISH   Then even these voices ceased, and of all the bustle of the day there only remained a quivering vibration, above the formidable piles of goods.
ENGLISH   On the ground-floor, they found themselves in the woollen department, a gallery entirely hung with white swanskin cloth and white flannel.
FRENCH   La tête levée, les regards luisants, elles lui souriaient.
ENGLISH   In point of fact he had ingeniously thought of buying some of his rival\'s silk for these mantles; so that it was Mouret, not he, who lost on the material.
ENGLISH   Along the half-built walls, pierced with empty bays, the electric lamps threw broad bluey rays, of blinding intensity.
ENGLISH   Come here and let me arrange you a bit.\"  Then she placed her before one of the tall glasses alternating with the massive doors of the cupboards containing the dresses.
FRENCH   On discutait la question chaque jour, au Café Saint- Roch, jusqu\'à minuit.
ENGLISH    \"I fancy those ladies are ruining you,\" resumed Vallagnosc, amused by the meeting.
ENGLISH   He\'s my equal, that\'s natural.
FRENCH    -- Ton père ne vous a donc rien laissé? Moi, je croyais qu\'il y avait encore quelques sous.
FRENCH    -- Voilà Baugé, dit Pauline, en désignant un grand garçon, debout près de la fontaine.
ENGLISH   Henriette, who was suffocating, had taken out her handkerchief and was crushing her lips with it.
FRENCH   Et, lentement, suant et soufflant, il venait du fond des magasins, à travers l\'émotion grandissante des vendeurs.
FRENCH    Bourdoncle, fils d\'un fermier pauvre des environs de Limoges, avait débuté jadis au Bonheur des Dames, en même temps que Mouret, lorsque le magasin occupait l\'angle de la place Gaillon.
ENGLISH   This was a total overthrow of her calculations; she herself had been caught in the trap she had laid.
FRENCH    Cependant, Denise descendit.
FRENCH   Les corsets et les tournures occupaient un comptoir, les corsets cousus, les corsets à taille longue, les corsets cuirasses, surtout les corsets de soie blanche, éventaillés de couleur, dont on avait fait ce jour-là un étalage spécial, une armée de mannequins sans tête et sans jambes, n\'alignant que des torses, des gorges de poupée aplaties sous la soie, d\'une lubricité troublante d\'infirme; et, près de là, sur d\'autres bâtons, les tournures de crin et de brillanté prolongeaient ces manches à balai en croupes énormes et tendues, dont le profil prenait une inconvenance caricaturale.
FRENCH    -- Quinze francs par mois.
FRENCH   Ce qu\'il y a de sûr, c\'est qu\'elle doit avoir pleuré.
ENGLISH    \"Silence!\" he resumed, furiously, \"or I\'ll clear the whole place!\"  However, Bourdoncle came running up, all anxiety at the idea of the scandal.
FRENCH   Mouret ne traitait plus avec un entrepreneur pour une somme fixe; il dirigeait aussi la cuisine, il en avait fait un service organisé comme un de ses rayons, ayant un chef, des sous- chefs, un inspecteur; et, s\'il déboursait davantage, il obtenait plus de travail d\'un personnel mieux nourri, calcul d\'une humanitairerie pratique qui avait longtemps consterné Bourdoncle.
FRENCH   Cette porte, haute et profonde comme un porche d\'église, surmontée d\'un groupe, l\'Industrie et le Commerce se donnant la main au milieu d\'une complication d\'attributs, était abritée sous une vaste marquise, dont les dorures fraîches semblaient éclairer les trottoirs d\'un coup de soleil.
FRENCH   Mais un froid terrible y tombait du zinc de la toiture, couverte des neiges de décembre; elle devait se pelotonner dans son lit, jeter tous ses vêtements sur elle, pleurer sous la couverture, pour que la gelée ne lui gerçât pas le visage.
FRENCH    -- Taisez-vous donc, mesdemoiselles! On ne s\'entend pas, ma parole d\'honneur!  Puis, elle se remit à crier:  -- Sept mantes à la vieille, sicilienne, première grandeur, à cent trente!...
ENGLISH   Just then, however, Mignot came down, with the twenty francs which he had just borrowed, and he stopped to slip ten francs into Albert\'s hand, making an appointment with him for the evening: a projected spree, hampered by lack of money, but still possible, notwithstanding the smallness of the sum secured.
ENGLISH   On hearing the rumours Deloche was so indignant that he wanted to slap the faces of the young ladies in Denise\'s department; and was only restrained from doing so by the fear of compromising her.
ENGLISH   It was that of Bourras who had called a chestnut-seller occupying a little box, against a wine shop opposite, in order to say to him: \"Here! Vigouroux, just keep a look-out on my place, will you? You see I\'ve taken the door handle away.
FRENCH   Vous n\'êtes pas à Valognes, étudiez nos Parisiennes...
FRENCH   Pourtant, l\'air de la campagne, vous comprenez...
FRENCH   de Boves et Vallagnosc, cependant, avaient quitté la fenêtre.
FRENCH   Tous deux suivirent d\'abord la galerie de la rue Neuve Saint-Augustin, que le blanc occupait d\'un bout à l\'autre.
ENGLISH   But the Lhommes were especially anxious, each day expecting to see their son Albert sent away, as the principals were very dissatisfied with his conduct at his pay-desk.
FRENCH   Les vendeurs s\'étaient ingéniés à décorer l\'étalage de tous leurs pots de porcelaine blanche, de toutes leurs fioles de verre blanc.
FRENCH   De tous les comptoirs, des vendeurs arrivaient un à un, débandés, se pressant en bas, à l\'entrée étroite du couloir de la cuisine, un couloir humide que des becs de gaz éclairaient continuellement.
ENGLISH   That poor fellow you saw just now is no more guilty than I am.\"  She said this with her brave, frank air, looking with her bright eyes straight into his face.
ENGLISH   She was in agony.
ENGLISH   For was she not going to assist that machine which was crushing the poor? However, she was carried away, as it were, by an invisible force, and felt that she could be doing no wrong.
ENGLISH   Ever since the morning, in spite of the feverish rush of business, every one had been talking of this affair.
ENGLISH   You are torturing me!\"  Little by little he was losing his strength; this last obstacle drove him frantic.
ENGLISH   Colomban was now half asleep behind the counter; and the evening passed away, slow and melancholy, only animated by Baudu\'s tramp, as he walked from one end of the empty shop to the other.
FRENCH   Le drapier était seul, dans la boutique sombre du Vieil Elbeuf.
FRENCH   Seulement, il y avait à craindre qu\'elles ne fussent rompues l\'une et l\'autre.
ENGLISH   \"We each stay with her in turn for a couple of hours.
FRENCH   Et, quand il s\'écartait, derrière son ventre tendu de blanc, on apercevait la cuisine flambante.
ENGLISH   She was known to be very extravagant, totally unable to resist certain temptations.
ENGLISH   \"You see I\'m merely walking round; I\'ve only come out of curiosity.\"  However, he succeeded in stopping her, and lowered his voice.
ENGLISH   I am a passionate fellow myself, and don\'t take life quietly; that\'s what interests me in it perhaps.\" He glanced towards the drawing-room, and lowered his voice.
ENGLISH   \"Three hundred pieces!\" he murmured.
ENGLISH   \"We must see their show.
FRENCH   Il n\'y avait point à s\'occuper de Jean.
FRENCH   Je ne ferai de vous qu\'un brave homme, allez! si vous vous remettez entre mes mains.
FRENCH   Puis, il continua une conversation commencée, en disant à Favier:  -- Alors, il a voulu vous battre?  -- Mais oui.
ENGLISH   This is Jean, and this is Pépé.
ENGLISH    Then he went upstairs, continuing his inspection, talking and bestirring himself more and more, but without finding any respite.
FRENCH    -- Je dis ça, je n\'en sais rien.
FRENCH    D\'un pas machinal, Mouret suivit les galeries, tellement absorbé, qu\'il s\'abandonnait à la poussée de la foule.
FRENCH    -- Il est plus heureux que toi, dit Mouret en se levant.
FRENCH   Mais elle n\'osa pas.
FRENCH   Parlons de notre affaire.
FRENCH    Mme Baudu l\'embrassa, très émue.
ENGLISH    \"Embrace me, my boy,\" he said in conclusion.
ENGLISH    Just as Denise went down, Favier was measuring a dress length of light silk, with pink spots, for Madame Boutarel, who had arrived in Paris from the South on the previous day.
FRENCH   Pendant des mois, il avait voulu voir comment une fille poussait, il s\'était amusé à cette expérience, sans comprendre qu\'il y jouait son coeur.
FRENCH   Chaque jour, de nouvelles histoires circulaient.
FRENCH   Hutin!...
ENGLISH    Six o\'clock was about to strike, the daylight decreasing out-of-doors was gradually forsaking the covered galleries, already dim, and even waning in the halls which gloom was slowly invading.
ENGLISH    \"Take care, I have company!\" she remarked, in a low voice, glancing towards the door of the larger room.
ENGLISH   \"Oh,\" said she, affecting to joke in her turn, \"the lamb always finishes by eating up the wolf.\"  Thereupon the baron, greatly amused, encouraged her with a nod.
FRENCH   Cette lutte devenait du reste entre ses mains la formule favorite, le principe d\'organisation qu\'il appliquait constamment.
FRENCH   Vous le détestez?  Elle avait gardé la main de Denise, assise près du lit, accoudée au traversin; et cette dernière, gagnée par une soudaine émotion, les joues envahies de rougeur, eut une faiblesse, à cette question directe et inattendue.
FRENCH   Alors, sa timidité augmenta, elle ne se sentit plus la force de les suivre, elle résolut de n\'entrer à son tour que lorsque le défilé aurait cessé, rougissante à l\'idée d\'être bousculée, sous la porte, au milieu de tous ces hommes.
FRENCH    -- Eh bien! madame, cette soie est du Paris-Bonheur, je l\'ai achetée moi-même, parfaitement!...
FRENCH    Justement, Mme Bouratel, elle qui achetait toujours, s\'en allait en disant:  -- Non, vous n\'avez rien qui me plaise...
FRENCH   Tout un coin étalait des garnitures et des couronnes de fleurs d\'oranger.
ENGLISH   For months he had wanted to see how a girl sprung up, and had amused himself with this experiment, not understanding that he was risking his heart.
ENGLISH   He therefore desired to celebrate the laying of the foundation stone; and made it a ceremony, besides distributing gratuities amongst his employees, and giving them game and champagne for dinner in the evening.
FRENCH   C\'était lui qui les possédait de la sorte, qui les tenait à sa merci, par son entassement continu de marchandises, par sa baisse des prix et ses rendus, sa galanterie et sa réclame.
FRENCH    Elle semblait très calme, souriante.
FRENCH    Et ses regards noyés faisaient le tour de la boutique sombre, comme si elle eût senti sa fille et la maison partir ensemble.
FRENCH   Il était évidemment à mille lieues de cette famille qui lui tombait sur les épaules.
FRENCH    Mais Jouve y apportait de la mollesse, car il avait pratiqué les femmes, et il songeait à se mettre du côté de cette enfant, qui pouvait être la maîtresse souveraine du lendemain.
ENGLISH   As a rule, he preferred not to mix himself up in affairs of this sort, which were fairly frequent; for notwithstanding the regular machine-like working, great disorder reigned in certain departments of The Ladies\' Paradise, and scarcely a week passed by without some employee being dismissed for theft.
FRENCH   Et c\'était comme une résurrection, il retrouvait chez Denise le bon sens, le juste équilibre de celle qu\'il avait perdue, jusqu\'à la voix douce, avare de paroles inutiles.
FRENCH    -- Qu\'y a-t-il? demanda vivement Denise.
FRENCH    -- C\'est bien, mademoiselle, dit-elle majestueusement, pour réserver son autorité.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! dit Vallagnosc très surpris, vous disiez Mme de Boves souffrante...
ENGLISH   And in this passionate atmosphere the stuffs themselves seemed endowed with life; the laces quivered, drooped, and concealed the depths of the shop with a disturbing air of mystery; even the thick square-cut lengths of cloth breathed, exhaling a tempting odour, while the tailor-made coats seemed to draw themselves up more erectly on the dummies, which acquired souls, and the velvet mantle expanded, supple and warm, as if falling from real shoulders, over a heaving bosom and quivering hips.
FRENCH   Favier n\'était pas de ces parties.
FRENCH    Et elle se hâta de retourner à son rayon.
FRENCH   C\'était son refuge contre ses tourments, au milieu des maçons établissant les piles d\'angle en pierre de taille, et des serruriers posant les fers des grandes charpentes.
ENGLISH    \"But we sell everything for nothing!\" he exclaimed gaily, taking up Madame Desforges\'s fan, which lay behind him on the table.
ENGLISH   \"If Monsieur Mouret keeps me in his employ,\" she gently replied, \"it\'s because he has no fault to find.
ENGLISH   The rooms were all alike, old cellars twelve feet by fifteen, which had been cemented over and fitted up as refectories; but the damp came through the paint-work, the yellow walls were covered with greenish spots; and, from the narrow windows, opening on the street, on a level with the pavement, there fell a livid light, incessantly traversed by the vague shadows of passers-by.
ENGLISH   However, the case of silk was now empty and two men were opening another.
ENGLISH    \"Follow mademoiselle,\" said Pauline, and then returning to Denise and again lowering her voice, she added: \"It\'s understood that I am to be appointed second-hand, eh?\"  Denise promised, with a laugh, by way of joking in her turn.
FRENCH    If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
FRENCH   Elle ne se décidait pas, se plaignait de la qualité des étoffes.
FRENCH    À partir de ce moment, Denise s\'intéressa aux histoires tendres de son rayon.
ENGLISH   You can see the people passing in the street.\" And, as Denise gazed with surprise at the ceiling just above the bed, where a chance lady-lodger had written her name--Ernestine--by drawing the flame of a candle over the plaster, he added with a smile: \"If I did a lot of repairs, I should never make both ends meet.
FRENCH   Il y eut un silence, la boutique semblait dormir, engourdie par le crépuscule blafard qui la noyait; tandis qu\'on entendait, derrière la tôle mince de la fermeture le fracas de la rue, la vie du plein jour passant avec le grondement des voitures et la bousculade des trottoirs.
FRENCH   Que diable! Colomban restait là, personne ne le lui volerait!  -- C\'est incroyable! répétait-il, une fille si bien élevée!  Mme Baudu n\'ajouta rien.
FRENCH   Il balbutiait aussi des remerciements, troublé devant Denise, qu\'il traitait maintenant en personne arrivée et d\'une classe supérieure.
ENGLISH   That young woman, who loved the suburbs with the passion of an actress living in the gas-light, in the heavy atmosphere of a crowd, wanted to lunch in an arbour, notwithstanding the sharp wind.
FRENCH   Mais le propriétaire, un ancien fruitier, un gredin comme eux, a voulu les faire chanter.
FRENCH    Vers onze heures, quelques dames se présentèrent.
FRENCH   Je vais voir.
ENGLISH   \"You can\'t think how happy you render me in consenting to walk with me.\"  And, aided by the darkness, after many awkward attempts, he ventured to tell her that he loved her.
ENGLISH    \"There, madame, that is all I can do,\" at last said Denise, rising up.
ENGLISH   That girl Denise, so simple and quiet, began to make him feel uneasy.
ENGLISH    At last the first-hand came and took the mantle off Denise\'s shoulders, saying to her in a low tone: \"Well! mademoiselle, here\'s a fine start.
FRENCH   On prétend qu\'il nous en veut.
FRENCH   Ainsi, il avait découvert qu\'elle ne résistait pas au bon marché, qu\'elle achetait sans besoin, quand elle croyait conclure une affaire avantageuse; et, sur cette observation, il basait son système des diminutions de prix, il baissait progressivement les articles non vendus, préférant les vendre à perte, fidèle au principe du renouvellement rapide des marchandises.
ENGLISH   On the Saturday evening, whilst giving a last look at the preparations for the Monday\'s great sale, he had been struck with the idea that the arrangement of the departments adopted by him was idiotic; and yet it seemed a perfectly logical one: the stuffs on one side, the made-up articles on the other, an intelligent order of things which would enable customers to find their way about by themselves.
FRENCH    -- Allons, dit-il, entrez, puisque vous êtes venus...
FRENCH   Ce service était celui qui prenait de jour en jour l\'importance la plus considérable: il nécessitait à présent deux cents employés, dont les uns ouvraient, lisaient, classaient les lettres venues de la province et de l\'étranger, tandis que les autres réunissaient dans des cases les marchandises demandées par les signataires.
FRENCH    -- Assez de paroles! finit-elle par dire sèchement, vous n\'êtes pas plus raisonnable que les autres, madame Frédéric...
ENGLISH    \"Go, my dear fellow, go, madame wants you,\" the baron said to him, with his air at once paternal and mocking.
FRENCH   Enfin, Mme Guibal s\'éloigna, continua sa lente promenade en tournant d\'un air ravi, autour du grand étalage de soies.
ENGLISH    But a bell rang, that for the second table, to which Favier belonged.
ENGLISH    However, when she found herself alone with Jouve she felt uneasy and annoyed, and quitted the table; but as she was going towards the door he stopped her saying: \"Mademoiselle Baudu----\"  Erect before her, he was smiling with a paternal air.
ENGLISH   Uncle Baudu, however, couldn\'t get over it, but continued his questions.
FRENCH   Moi, ce matin, en les voyant sur le toit, j\'avais fermé ma porte.
ENGLISH   I love you, Denise!\" She was standing there very pale, listening to him and still looking straight into his face.
FRENCH   Il s\'impatientait, sans trouver cependant la hardiesse de déranger le tête-à-tête.
FRENCH   Elle ne raisonnait pas, elle sentait seulement qu\'elle l\'avait toujours aimé, depuis l\'heure où elle avait frémi et balbutié devant lui.
FRENCH   Hein! et vous?  Mme Aurélie interrompit violemment la conversation.
FRENCH    -- Voulez-vous savoir? continua-t-il à voix plus basse, eh bien! il y a des moments où je me sens le plus coupable, dans notre malheur.
FRENCH   Il était quatre heures, les rayons du soleil à son coucher entraient obliquement par les larges baies de la façade, éclairaient de biais les vitrages des halls; et, dans cette clarté d\'un rouge d\'incendie, montaient, pareilles à une vapeur d\'or, les poussières épaisses, soulevées depuis le matin par le piétinement de la foule.
FRENCH   Seulement, ce sont encore ces diablesses de mèches!  Il s\'était levé, il vint corriger sa coiffure, du même geste familier dont Mme Aurélie avait essayé de le faire la veille.
FRENCH    -- Oh! mon Dieu! reprit-il, vous pleurez, mademoiselle, vous pleurez...
FRENCH   On doit toujours croire les femmes honnêtes, monsieur.
FRENCH   Elle pâlit, elle semble se désespérer.
FRENCH   À coup sûr, la demoiselle avait la force d\'une femme adorée qui se refuse; mais le patron, de son côté, était fort de sa richesse, de son heureux veuvage, de son orgueil qu\'une exigence dernière pouvait exaspérer.
FRENCH   La foule pressée du matin donnait à peine un coup d\'oeil aux vitrines, sans ralentir le pas.
ENGLISH   Marguerite risked a slight chuckle, like a well-behaved girl who restrains herself; but Clara left a customer so as to enjoy the fun at her ease; and even some saleswomen of the under-clothing department came in, attracted by the talking.
FRENCH   Puis, lorsque Mme Desforges levait les yeux, c\'était le long des escaliers, sur les ponts volants, autour des rampes de chaque étage, une montée continue et bourdonnante, tout un peuple en l\'air, voyageant dans les découpures de l\'énorme charpente métallique, se dessinant en noir sur la clarté diffuse des vitres émaillées.
FRENCH   Mais elle retomba aussitôt.
ENGLISH    \"See! he\'s followed me,\" she added, after hastily relating the adventure to Denise.
FRENCH    -- Tenez! voilà pour le petit, dit-il de son air brusque.
ENGLISH   But what would you answer if I advised you to say \'yes?\' You\'d send me about my business, eh? And so, when I say \'no,\' don\'t you interfere in the matter.\"  Then, the coach having stopped at the cemetery gate, he alighted from it with the young girl.
ENGLISH   You are half asleep now, you lead too quiet a life.
ENGLISH   His face was beaming with delight; and after a short silence he resumed: \"You\'ve made up your mind, haven\'t you? Well, I approve your decision.\"  All at once, however, Mouret planted himself before him, and in his terrible voice thundered: \"I say, my man, you\'re rather too lively.
FRENCH   C\'était Mouret qui faisait de nouveau le tour des rayons.
FRENCH   Ce jour-là, l\'or et l\'argent dominaient, il gravissait lentement l\'escalier, portant trois sacs énormes.
ENGLISH   Then they went out into the world, each on his own side, and had now met again, after the lapse of ten years, already changed and looking older.
ENGLISH    \"That\'s a good idea!\" exclaimed Hutin.
ENGLISH    Then a further change of opinion took place in Denise\'s favour.
ENGLISH   And it was there they decided one evening to start the campaign against The Ladies\' Paradise.
ENGLISH   The street was full of people, and cab-drivers, unable to get along, were swearing, while the bearers set the stretcher before the shop in order to open both glass doors.
FRENCH    Elle ne broncha pas encore, elle dit avec son assurance superbe:  -- C\'est ça, fouillez-moi...
ENGLISH   And thereupon with her throat parched, unable to find the consoling words she would have liked to say, she had to explain the matter.
ENGLISH    \"By the way,\" resumed Pauline, \"weren\'t you looking for Monsieur Robineau yesterday? He\'s come back.\"  At this Denise thought herself saved.
FRENCH    Le silence régna.
FRENCH   Et la foule paraissait noire, on eût dit les patineurs d\'un lac de Pologne, en décembre.
ENGLISH   The former had taken Hutin\'s room at the Hôtel de Smyrne, when that gentleman, on being appointed second-hand, had hired a suite of three rooms; and the two salesmen came to The Ladies\' Paradise together in the morning, and waited for each other in the evening in order to go away together.
FRENCH   Il dominait, il couvrait un quartier de son ombre.
FRENCH   Même aujourd\'hui que la passion du banquier, homme sceptique et fin, tournait à une simple affection paternelle, si elle se permettait d\'avoir des amants qu\'il lui tolérait, elle apportait, dans ses coups de coeur, une mesure et un tact si délicats, une science du monde si adroitement appliquée, que les apparences restaient sauves et que personne ne se serait permis de mettre tout haut son honnêteté en doute.
FRENCH    Mais elle venait d\'apercevoir Mouret, elle reprit en riant:  -- Ah! monsieur, ce n\'était point pour vous faire de la réclame, puisque j\'ignorais que vous fussiez là...
FRENCH   Son embarras grandissait d\'être ainsi en spectacle, elle se décidait à faire dans le quartier une promenade d\'une demi-heure, lorsque la vue d\'un jeune homme, qui arrivait rapidement par la rue Port-Mahon, l\'arrêta une minute encore.
FRENCH   Dans l\'arrière-boutique, on les entendait s\'embrasser.
FRENCH   Les clientes riaient, enchantées de ce duel, émues des coups terribles que se portaient les deux maisons, pour leur plaire.
FRENCH   Les malins mettaient un déjeuner sur la carte du mariage final; pourtant, les autres, ceux qui croyaient au départ, ne risquaient pas non plus leur argent sans de bonnes raisons.
ENGLISH   And the frontage ground will suffice to compensate you.
FRENCH   Enfin, elle s\'arrêta contre une de ces claies de bois.
ENGLISH   From all the counters, came salesmen one by one, hastening, helter-skelter, through the narrow entrance to the kitchen passage down below, a damp passage always lighted by gas.
FRENCH    -- Puis, il faudrait être peignée, murmura-t-il.
FRENCH   Et ils ne voyaient au- delà que du ciel, une nappe de ciel, qui reflétait, dans l\'eau dormante des vitres, le vol de ses nuages et le bleu tendre de son azur.
FRENCH   Et elle n\'ouvrait pas son sac, elle le serrait sur ses genoux, parlait de sa fille Valentine, âgée de quatorze ans, une de ses coquetteries les plus chères, car elle l\'habillait comme elle, de toutes les nouveautés de la mode, dont elle subissait l\'irrésistible séduction.
FRENCH   Je vous choisis, c\'est bien naturel...
FRENCH   Lorsqu\'elle entendit Mme Marty dire qu\'elle ne voulait pas dépasser deux cents francs, elle eut une moue de pitié.
FRENCH   Et la situation qui la décidait au départ, était justement résultée des jugements qu\'on portait sur sa conduite, à sa continuelle surprise.
FRENCH    -- C\'est comme moi, déclara l\'autre.
FRENCH    Une chaleur lui venait des mains tièdes de cet homme, l\'emplissait d\'une lâcheté délicieuse.
FRENCH   Un nouveau silence régna.
FRENCH    Avant de se coucher, le soir, comme Mme Baudu était déjà au lit, Baudu se promena longtemps dans la chambre.
ENGLISH   Several cooks, quite white in the ruddy glow of the cast-iron, were attending to the evening soup mounted on metal ladders and armed with skimmers fixed to long handles.
ENGLISH   Mouret, it was said, had made arrangements with Baron Hartmann, the chairman of the Crédit Immobilier, and would occupy the whole block, excepting the future frontage in the Rue du Dix-Décembre, where the baron wished to erect a rival establishment to the Grand Hôtel.
ENGLISH   Never mind! When they want to enlarge any further they\'ll have to throw bridges over the streets.
FRENCH   Leurs yeux pâlissaient, un léger frisson courait sur leurs nuques.
FRENCH   Du milieu de la place Gaillon, on apercevait ce salon oriental, fait uniquement de tapis et de portières, que des garçons avaient accrochés sous ses ordres.
ENGLISH   Madame Baudu, who had finished her lunch, was standing there, quite white, with her pale eyes fixed on the monster; and resigned though she tried to be, she could never catch sight of that place across the road, without mute despair filling her eyes with tears.
FRENCH   Alors, il finit par se décider, il descendit l\'escot, qu\'elle jugea trop rude.
FRENCH   Des personnes, perdant tout scrupule devant ces gourmandises gratuites, se rendaient malades.
FRENCH   Un instant, il essaya de causer de l\'oncle Baudu; puis, il dut se taire, en voyant le malaise de la jeune fille.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! look, mamma,\" said Blanche, who was ransacking a box close by, full of cheap Valenciennes, \"we might take some of this for pillow-cases.\"  Madame de Boves did not reply and her daughter on turning her flabby face saw her, with her hands plunged amidst the lace, slipping some Alençon flounces up the sleeve of her mantle.
FRENCH   Du reste, à mesure qu\'elle avançait, au travers des rayons, les vendeurs s\'émotionnaient et s\'inclinaient, dans le doute de ce qu\'elle serait le lendemain.
ENGLISH   They could not have been more concealed, more utterly lost had they been far away in the country, under the screening foliage of the trees.
FRENCH    -- C\'est que, voyez-vous, continua-t-il en s\'embrouillant davantage, j\'ai l\'idée de voir si l\'on ne pourrait pas m\'y prendre, et vous m\'auriez donné un renseignement.
ENGLISH   As Bourdoncle, vanquished, repeated with despair to his friends that he would himself give a great deal to prevail upon Denise to accept Mouret, it was concluded that she still refused to do so, and that her all-powerfulness resulted from her refusal.
ENGLISH    The little boy, frightened by the unusual presence of a gentleman, was walking gravely by his sister\'s side, holding her tightly by the hand.
ENGLISH   She then saw where she was; the silk department must be in front of her.
ENGLISH    When Denise reached The Old Elbeuf, Madame Baudu, with her small white face consumed by anæmia, was there alone, sitting motionless behind the pay-desk, and watching over the silence and emptiness of the shop.
FRENCH   Albert ne disparut que deux jours plus tard; sans doute, sa mère avait obtenu qu\'on ne déshonorât pas la famille par une exécution immédiate.
ENGLISH   And Mouret was at length approaching the realization of his dream: this façade, about to arise in the Rue du Dix-Décembre, was like the very blossoming of his fortune.
ENGLISH   And, alone, amid this calmness, Madame Bourdelais was amusing her children, talking very loudly, as in a conquered place.
ENGLISH    The young girl, who understood her friend\'s meaning by her smile and stare of tender curiosity, turned very red and answered: \"Oh! no, my dear.
FRENCH   La fille qui se présenta était Mlle de Fontenailles, mariée récemment à Joseph.
FRENCH   Mais, lorsqu\'il se fut rappelé leurs conversations anciennes sur la bêtise vide et l\'inutile torture de la vie, il répondit:  -- Sans doute, jamais je n\'ai tant vécu...
ENGLISH    \"You don\'t say anything?\" repeated Baudu.
ENGLISH    Thereupon Denise quietly gave her reasons for her preference, just as she had at Robineau\'s: explaining the logical evolution in business, the necessities of modern times, the greatness of these new creations, in short, the growing well-being of the public.
FRENCH   Elle pénétrait jusqu\'à son coeur, et il se troublait, il redoublait d\'invectives.
FRENCH   Elle ne mordait point aux affaires, la tête cassée par tous ces chiffres, ne comprenant pas qu\'on se donnât un pareil souci, lorsqu\'il était si facile de rire et de s\'aimer.
FRENCH   C\'était abominable, et elle accusa carrément la lingerie d\'avoir fait tomber Albert dans un guet-apens; oui, le coup était monté contre elle, on cherchait à la déshonorer en perdant un enfant sans expérience, après s\'être convaincu que son rayon restait inattaquable.
ENGLISH   Denise, feeling rather awkward, glanced at his shop.
FRENCH   Hein? nous ne nous retrouvons pas pour nous quereller.
FRENCH    Qu\'importe ce que vous appelez du terrain perdu, si ce terrain vous rend un intérêt énorme!...
ENGLISH   at the utmost; only this will finish by representing millions when we can operate on large quantities of goods incessantly renewed.
ENGLISH   It was here that the latter had heard Favier relating, at a neighbouring table, some abominable things about the way in which Denise had \"hooked\" the governor.
ENGLISH   For a while, the second-hand, Madame Frédéric, appeared not to enter into the conspiracy, but this must have been by inadvertence, for she showed herself equally harsh directly she saw to what annoyances her good-nature was likely to expose her.
FRENCH   Ah! mon vieux, ne te moque pas, ce sont les heures les plus courtes, celles où l\'on meurt de souffrance!  Il baissa la voix, il continua gaiement, sous ses larmes mal essuyées:  -- Oui, tu sais tout, n\'est-ce pas? elles viennent, à elles deux, de me hacher le coeur.
FRENCH   C\'est impossible.
FRENCH   Elle ne criait si fort que pour embrouiller les choses, car elle n\'avait aucune illusion sur son fils, elle le savait capable de toutes les sottises.
FRENCH    Afin de contenter quelques clientes qui étaient venues, on avait dû bouleverser déjà les armoires; et, sur les deux longues tables de chêne, à gauche et à droite du salon, traînait un fouillis de manteaux, de pelisses, de rotondes, des vêtements de toutes les tailles et de toutes les étoffes.
ENGLISH   She caught hold of the hand of Denise who was leaning towards her, also quite overcome.
ENGLISH   Pieces of velvet hung from the columns, forming a creamy white background against which silk and satin draperies showed with a metallic and porcelain-like whiteness; and there were also festoons of poult and gros grain silks, light foulards and surahs, which varied from the dull white of a Norwegian blonde to the transparent white, warmed by the sun, of a fair Italian or Spanish beauty.
ENGLISH   Denise entered the first one.
FRENCH   Et, maintenant, elle s\'abandonnait dans cette ombre, des sanglots venaient de l\'étouffer, en pensant que, si Hutin se trouvait à la place de Deloche et lui disait ainsi des tendresses, elle serait sans force.
FRENCH   Pourtant, il se décida, il demanda doucement:  -- Est-ce qu\'il était bien nécessaire de tout bouleverser ainsi, à la veille de notre exposition?  D\'abord, Mouret haussa les épaules, sans répondre.
FRENCH   Vallagnosc, qui achevait sa promenade à travers les comptoirs, témoignait plus de surprise que d\'admiration; car, après tout, pensait-il dans sa nonchalance de pessimiste, ce n\'était jamais que beaucoup de calicot à la fois.
ENGLISH   Deloche, glad to be occupied, again began emptying the boxes before the mother and daughter.
FRENCH   C\'était un homme petit et vigoureux, à grosse tête alsacienne, et dont la face épaisse s\'éclairait d\'une flamme d\'intelligence, au moindre pli de la bouche, au plus léger clignement des paupières.
ENGLISH   Of what good was this conquest of the world, since it was no, always no?  Nowadays of an evening, when he arrived at Lhomme\'s desk, he still from force of habit glanced at the amount of the takings written on a card, which the cashier stuck up on an iron file beside him; this figure rarely fell below a hundred thousand francs, sometimes on big sale days it ran up to eight and nine hundred thousand; but the amount no longer sounded in Mouret\'s ears like a trumpet-blast, he regretted having looked at it, and bitterly went his way, full of hatred and scorn of money.
FRENCH   Venez, nous allons faire notre tour dans les magasins.
ENGLISH   \"But somehow I\'ve no luck; there are some days that are precious bad, my word! I\'ve just made another miss, that old frump hasn\'t bought anything.\"  As he spoke he glanced towards a lady who was walking off, casting looks of disgust at all the goods.
FRENCH   Décidément, il n\'avait plus de nez, il ne ferait pas quatre sous.
FRENCH   Vous verrez la foule, quand notre clientèle n\'étranglera plus la rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, et qu\'elle pourra librement se ruer par la voie large où six voitures rouleront à l\'aise.
FRENCH   Enfin, le scandale fut étouffé, par égard pour la première des confections, que Mouret lui-même traitait avec déférence.
FRENCH   Vous savez comme je l\'aime, vous qui êtes devenu notre ami.
FRENCH   Personne ne devait soupçonner leur affection, car on se serait moqué d\'eux; mais cela ne l\'empêchait pas de rêver de brusques violences, le coup de poing vengeur, si jamais on s\'attaquait à elle devant lui.
ENGLISH   When the coffin, draped with white, crossed the Place Gaillon, the sombre looks of the followers once more plunged into the windows of the big establishment where only two saleswomen stood looking on, pleased with the diversion.
ENGLISH   Though he did not now dare to touch her, he still thought her bewitchingly pretty.
ENGLISH   And all this caused Denise to live more than ever at The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   Jusqu\'au petit jour, elle eut des cauchemars, Pépé jeté à la rue, tandis qu\'elle retournait les pavés de ses doigts meurtris, pour voir s\'il n\'y avait pas de l\'argent dessous.
FRENCH   Lui, exagérant l\'épaisse bonhomie de sa face, semblait cacher, derrière ses paupières tombantes, la flamme intérieure qui le brûlait; tandis que, la tête courbée davantage sous sa chevelure trop lourde, elle, s\'abandonnait, comme ravagée par une souffrance secrète.
ENGLISH   \"Really! whatever for? If she\'s ill she should say so.
FRENCH   Veuillez porter ça à la caisse 10, pour Mme Desforges, n\'est-ce pas?  En habituée de la maison, elle donnait son nom à une caisse et y envoyait chacune de ses emplettes, sans se faire suivre par un commis.
ENGLISH   He had brought with him a loaf, and a milk-can full of broth.
FRENCH   Robineau, hier? Il est revenu.
FRENCH    -- Mais je ne demande pas à m\'en aller, répondit-elle en souriant.
ENGLISH   The manager had thought this arrangement more seemly.
ENGLISH   But on raising his head, he perceived Denise, who had drawn back.
FRENCH    XI   Bouthemont, ce jour-là, arriva le premier chez Mme Desforges, au thé de quatre heures.
FRENCH   On n\'est pas plus sotte.
ENGLISH   And Henriette suddenly dropped upon a chair, twisting her handkerchief between her febrile fingers, and, repeating amid her sobs: \"Good heavens! how wretched I am!\"  He stood perfectly still, looking at her for several seconds, and then went quietly away.
ENGLISH   He thought he ought to warn her, and so in a joking way he muttered: \"Take care, my dear, or he\'ll eat you all up.\"  A flash of jealousy darted from Henriette\'s fine eyes.
FRENCH   Il avait su que le Crédit Immobilier faisait, secrètement, acheter les maisons du pâté où se trouvait le Bonheur des Dames, non seulement celles qui devaient tomber sous la pioche des démolisseurs, mais encore les autres, celles qui allaient rester debout.
FRENCH    Pendant cette explication, Denise avait cessé de regarder dans la rue.
ENGLISH   \"Thanks,\" said she, \"I\'ll go round the other way then, and pass through the silk department.
ENGLISH   Notwithstanding the difference in their characters, a fast friendship had rendered them inseparable until they were examined for their bachelor\'s degrees, which they took, the one with honours, the other in just a passable manner after two vexatious rebuffs.
ENGLISH   The kitchen and dining-rooms, old cellars turned into habitable apartments, were on the left near the corner of the Place Gaillon.
ENGLISH   Madame Desforges, daughter of a Councillor of State, was the widow of a speculator, who had left her a fortune, underrated to the point of nothingness by some and greatly over-estimated by others.
ENGLISH   \"I don\'t know her, sir,\" Mignot stammered out: \"She\'s the one who came----\"  \"Don\'t tell lies!\" interrupted Mouret, more violently still.
FRENCH    Mme de Boves partit très vexée.
ENGLISH   I can\'t speak with certainty, never having seen them together.
ENGLISH   Since she had been writing in this mechanical way, amidst the calling-out of the goods, a peaceful feeling had stolen over her.
FRENCH   Pendant quinze jours, Denise les sentit gênés avec elle; et elle dut parler la première, dire qu\'elle avait une place autre part.
FRENCH    Mais sa voix trembla, il eut un rire contraint.
FRENCH   Cinq ou six femmes, vêtues de robes de soie, très coquettes avec leurs chignons frisés et leurs crinolines rejetées en arrière, s\'y agitaient en causant.
ENGLISH   She could also do some adding-up, it would save time.
FRENCH    Ensuite, son tourment fut d\'avoir le rayon contre elle.
ENGLISH    \"I wish Monsieur Mouret to judge,\" resumed Henriette.
ENGLISH   Good conduct is absolutely necessary here.\"  He stopped, choosing his words, in order not to yield to the furious anger which was rising within him.
ENGLISH   She accepted her son-in-law\'s arm with a majestic air, and as Mouret bowed to her with respectful gallantry, he heard her saying: \"They\'ve apologized to me.
FRENCH   Est-ce que les chiffres ne sont pas là et ne démontrent pas la progression constante de notre vente? D\'abord, avec un capital de cinq cent mille francs, je faisais deux millions d\'affaires.
FRENCH   Ensuite, il célébra la marque en chiffres connus.
ENGLISH    \"This is the Valenciennes for my daughter,\" said she.
FRENCH    -- Denise Baudu, madame.
FRENCH   Vous le savez, quand il y a du travail, nous ne refusons pas des hommes.
ENGLISH   \"A little softer, mademoiselle.
FRENCH   Hutin.
ENGLISH    On reaching the ground-floor, occupied by the shops, Mouret went straight to pay-desk No.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! I could hear them digging a hole through the wall.
ENGLISH    \"Who? Madame Cabin?\" replied Pauline.
FRENCH   Il lui prit les mains, il balbutia:  -- Partez vite, mon enfant, oubliez cette maison.
ENGLISH   They noticed your departure, and are furious about it.\"  He referred to Bourdoncle and the other persons who had an interest in the business, as if he were not himself the master.
FRENCH   Je suis bien heureuse de vous revoir, et si je vous ai fait de la peine, veuillez me le pardonner.
ENGLISH   At last, when five o\'clock struck, he had to sign the day\'s correspondence, and the mechanical working of his hand began again, whilst she rose up before him more domineering than ever, seizing him entirely, to hold possession of him throughout the solitary and ardent hours of the night.
FRENCH   Denise avait encore pâli, au milieu de tout ce monde qui se moquait.
ENGLISH   And despite her good heart, her eyes ceaselessly turned to The Ladies\' Paradise, as if, saleswoman as she was, she felt the need of warming herself in the glow of that immense business.
FRENCH   C\'étaient une pièce de quarante sous pour échapper à la jalousie d\'une femme, et des cinq francs, et des six francs qui devaient réparer l\'honneur d\'une pauvre fille, que son père tuerait sans cela.
FRENCH    -- Mon Dieu! ça ne vaut pas davantage, murmura Mme Guiball.
FRENCH    -- Non, merci, on m\'attend chez moi...
FRENCH   Mouret s\'était de nouveau mis à sa disposition: ce qu\'elle ferait pour son oncle et les autres, serait bien fait.
ENGLISH   When Jean suddenly dropped into the midst of this poverty, he called himself a scoundrel with such despairing violence that she was obliged to tell some falsehood to reassure him; and she even occasionally found the means to slip a two-franc piece into his hand, by way of proving that she still had money.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, dit tout d\'un coup Baudu, causons peu et causons bien...
FRENCH   Et ne pleurez plus, je vous en prie.
ENGLISH   Six months had passed thus, and the dull winter season having again returned, she was despairing of finding a situation before March, when, one evening in January, Deloche, who was watching for her in a doorway, gave her a bit of advice.
ENGLISH   Tell him, too, that he will ruin himself if he insists on keeping to his ridiculous old-fashioned ways.\"  Denise turned quite white again.
FRENCH    Bourras était un grand vieillard à tête de prophète, chevelu et barbu, avec des yeux perçants sous de gros sourcils embroussaillés.
ENGLISH   As for the tittle-tattle about Madame Aurélie this was certainly false; mere invention, spread abroad by discontented saleswomen just for fun.
ENGLISH    \"You don\'t mean it,\" he murmured; \"it must be a joke, she\'s too ugly!\"  \"The fact is, there\'s nothing handsome about her,\" replied Mouret, not daring to defend her, although he was still moved by the rapture she had displayed downstairs before his arrangement of the silks.
ENGLISH   Mouret could only see her heavy blonde tresses, twisted at the back of her delicate neck; but by the slight tremor which was raising them, he could imagine the uneasiness and shame of her face.
FRENCH    Et, lorsqu\'elle tint la carafe, elle vida d\'un trait un grand verre.
FRENCH   Maintenant, dans tous les rayons, des écroulements pareils encombraient le sol; les casiers, les cartons, les armoires se vidaient peu à peu, tandis que les marchandises débordaient de toutes parts, sous les pieds, entre les tables, dans une crue continuelle.
FRENCH   On la connaissait pour sa rage de dépense, sans force devant la tentation, d\'une honnêteté stricte, incapable de céder à un amant, mais tout de suite lâche et la chair vaincue, devant le moindre bout de chiffon.
ENGLISH    \"Well! I prefer diverting myself.
FRENCH    -- Très bien! très bien! répétait Mouret, en affectant toujours de lire.
FRENCH    Il buta contre une marche, il monta, en multipliant les avertissements.
FRENCH   Et, comme en effet le garçon jetait de continuels coups d\'oeil vers ce comptoir, les vendeuses se mirent à rire.
FRENCH   Il eut une explosion suprême de douleur.
ENGLISH   It was also said that he was about to take a situation at the Grands Magasins du Louvre.
ENGLISH    \"Pooh!\" he would say, \"we are young yet.
FRENCH   Jamais! je ne veux pas! c\'est bien entendu.
FRENCH   Voyons, je suis votre aînée, j\'ai vingt-six ans et demi, sans que cela paraisse...
ENGLISH   You have an idea; you fight for it, you hammer it into people\'s heads, and you see it grow and triumph.
FRENCH   C\'était vrai, elle adorait Mouret pour sa jeunesse et ses triomphes, jamais un homme ne l\'avait ainsi prise tout entière, dans un frisson de sa chair et de son orgueil; mais, à la pensée de le perdre, elle entendait aussi sonner le glas de la quarantaine, elle se demandait avec terreur comment remplacer ce grand amour.
ENGLISH   Despite the solitude, Denise would at times turn round anxiously, thinking, she had seen a shadow pass on the bare, pale yellow walls.
ENGLISH   They all jumped up, breaking the melancholy silence.
FRENCH   Le lit, dans l\'angle de la porte, laissait tout juste le passage d\'une personne.
ENGLISH   But I\'m quite certain that your idea is not so good as mine.
FRENCH   Mouret alors s\'égayait, malgré sa fièvre.
ENGLISH   A single window overlooked a small back-yard, which communicated with the street by a dark passage running along the side of the house.
ENGLISH    \"How much?\" she asked.
FRENCH   Il est décroché, le million!  Mais il remarqua la préoccupation fébrile de Mouret, il comprit et se calma.
FRENCH   Il répéta qu\'il était de son époque.
FRENCH    Mouret parlait toujours.
FRENCH   Des rencontres, à chaque instant, les arrêtaient.
FRENCH   Elle était très brune, très jolie, avec une douceur gaie qui lui donnait un grand charme.
FRENCH   L\'autre yole doit être montée par une équipe d\'étudiants.
ENGLISH   He who had entertained the boldest schemes and whose daring at the time of the introduction of gas-lighting was still spoken of, remained in the present instance uneasy and obstinate.
ENGLISH    \"I shan\'t tire myself, madame.
FRENCH   Au premier, les confections, la parfumerie, les dentelles, les châles, s\'étaient rangés avec dévotion, comme sur le passage du bon Dieu.
ENGLISH   As he had promised his daughter and the shop, strict probity forced him to deliver both in good condition, without defects or debts.
FRENCH   Mais, au lieu de s\'emporter comme elle le craignait, il devenait très pâle, il succombait sous une émotion douloureuse, d\'une amère résignation.
ENGLISH   Striking the silk with his open hand he exclaimed excitedly: \"I know that, that\'s why I want to give it to our customers.
FRENCH   Pourtant, dans le fiacre, elle détourna les yeux, gênée, lorsque Pauline mit un gros baiser sur les lèvres de son amant.
ENGLISH   Jean certainly worked at a cabinet-maker\'s, a repairer of old furniture, but didn\'t earn a sou.
ENGLISH   Hutin and Favier were still watching for them, but on seeing that they did not return began to relieve their feelings.
FRENCH    -- Assez causé, et place aux autres! conclut le drapier, en donnant le signal de se lever de table.
FRENCH    Deux jours plus tard, comme Hutin était monté à l\'atelier des confections, en haut, sous les toits, pour recommander lui-même une ouvrière, il eut un léger sursaut, en apercevant, au bout d\'un couloir, Denise et Deloche accoudés devant une fenêtre ouverte, si enfoncés dans une conversation intime, qu\'ils ne tournèrent pas la tête.
FRENCH   Il entrait au bureau de défalcation, un service de trente-cinq jeunes gens, les débutants de la comptabilité, chargés de contrôler les notes de débit et de calculer le tant pour cent des vendeurs.
ENGLISH   However, Denise went down.
FRENCH   Lui qui se débattait depuis des mois, qui le matin encore jurait d\'étouffer sa passion, cédait tout d\'un coup, saisi du vertige des hauteurs, heureux de faire ce qu\'il croyait être une sottise.
FRENCH   Depuis le matin, il évitait Bourdoncle, dont les réflexions inquiètes l\'irritaient.
ENGLISH   \"I don\'t know how to tell you----\"  But she was cut short by the appearance of Lhomme on the threshold.
FRENCH   Ce n\'est pas convenable, d\'être ainsi ensemble.
FRENCH   Au fond, une grande écharpe en dentelle de Bruges, d\'un prix considérable, élargissait un voile d\'autel, deux ailes déployées, d\'une blancheur rousse; des volants de point d\'Alençon se trouvaient jetés en guirlandes; puis, c\'était, à pleines mains, un ruissellement de toutes les dentelles, les malines, les valenciennes, les applications de Bruxelles, les points de Venise, comme une tombée de neige.
FRENCH    Denise vit pourtant un jour Albert Lhomme, le fils de la première, glisser un billet dans la main d\'une demoiselle de la lingerie, après avoir traversé plusieurs fois le rayon d\'un air d\'indifférence.
FRENCH   Ce jour-là, une excitation nerveuse devait troubler la délicatesse de son flair.
FRENCH   Elles avaient pris d\'assaut les magasins, elles y campaient comme en pays conquis, ainsi qu\'une horde envahissante, installée dans la débâcle des marchandises.
ENGLISH    In the bright light of the central hall, two young men were talking in a low voice at the silk counter.
FRENCH   La clarté matinale découpait la noire silhouette de leurs vêtements de deuil, un jour oblique dorait leurs cheveux blonds.
FRENCH   Puis, on avait ri de la malchance de Deloche, toujours affamé, et tombant toujours, par une sorte de destinée maudite, sur le plus mauvais morceau de la table.
ENGLISH   If some still babbled, from that itching of the tongue which infects every assemblage of men and women, all nevertheless bowed very low before her face.
FRENCH   Allez, allez donc, monsieur Hutin.
FRENCH   Ça me prend dans la poitrine et dans la tête, puis ça va partout, ça me tue.
FRENCH   Tu me défends de venir.
FRENCH    -- Imaginez-vous, dit Mme Marty, je descendais de voiture, lorsque j\'ai vu arriver Mme de Boves sous les arcades.
ENGLISH   \"They\'re killing themselves inside.
ENGLISH   He had been standing there with bloodshot eyes and contracted mouth, beside himself with rage at the display made by The Ladies\' Paradise, when the sight of the girl and her brothers had completed his exasperation.
FRENCH   Avec leurs airs de femmes distinguées, est-ce qu\'on peut dire aujourd\'hui!  Favier regardait son cahier de notes de débit.
ENGLISH   Behind him and his companion followed the crew.
ENGLISH    \"There\'s another they\'ve taken from us!\" murmured the draper.
FRENCH   Et l\'inspecteur Jouve, l\'ancien capitaine retraité, était là, en redingote et en cravate blanche, avec sa décoration, comme une enseigne de vieille probité, accueillant les dames d\'un air gravement poli, se penchant vers elles pour leur indiquer les rayons.
ENGLISH   In presence of this condemned family, Denise, whose heart was overflowing with pity, felt for an instant afraid that she might be wicked.
FRENCH    -- Le travail! dit Vallagnosc.
FRENCH    Et la réclamation de Mignot fut enterrée.
FRENCH   Mais c\'est elle, l\'héroïne de l\'aventure!  -- Peut-être, répondit le chef de rayon, toujours souriant et bien décidé à ne pas dire la vérité.
FRENCH   Elle t\'attend, elle t\'a demandée toute la nuit.
ENGLISH   In nine years\' time he hoped to be dead, so as not to see it.
FRENCH   Ils sont affreux.
ENGLISH   The procession had again started off at the same slow pace; and, on leaning out once more, Denise saw her uncle walking behind the hearse with his heavy step, which seemed to regulate the rumbling, painful march of the cortège.
ENGLISH    \"You have a room to let, sir?\" said Denise, approaching him in obedience to an instinctive impulse.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, depuis près de trois mois, il menait une vie terrible de plaisirs, semant l\'argent avec une prodigalité dont on causait: il avait acheté un hôtel à une rouleuse de coulisses, il était mangé par deux ou trois autres coquines à la fois, qui semblaient lutter de caprices coûteux et bêtes.
FRENCH   Elle ne pouvait rencontrer le jeune homme face à face, sans éprouver une honte, comme s\'il lui rappelait une faute ancienne.
FRENCH    Et le grand voyage commença, le long des galeries encombrées.
FRENCH   Votre visite lui fera plaisir, et il n\'est pas homme à vous tenir rancune, si vous lui offrez seulement un bénéfice d\'un centime par mètre.
FRENCH   Et il flairait là le projet de quelque établissement futur, il était très inquiet pour les agrandissements dont il élargissait le rêve, pris de peur à l\'idée de se heurter un jour contre une société puissante, propriétaire d\'immeubles qu\'elle ne lâcherait certainement pas.
FRENCH   À mon dernier voyage, quand je me suis fâché avec Gaujean, celui-ci voulait bien mettre cent métiers sur ce modèle, mais il exigeait vingt-cinq centimes de plus par mètre.
FRENCH   Et elle, pendant qu\'il la sermonnait, ayant aperçu le portrait de Mme Hédouin, dont le beau visage régulier souriait gravement dans le cadre d\'or, se trouvait reprise d\'un frisson, malgré les paroles encourageantes qu\'il lui adressait.
ENGLISH    \"Tell me, is he with that woman?\" the sick girl then eagerly inquired while catching hold of her cousin\'s hand, and making her sit down on the edge of the bed.
ENGLISH   Not a gas-jet was burning there; only a few lighted oil-lamps hung here and there from the branches of the chandeliers; and these scattered lights, like yellow specks fading away in the gloom, resembled the lanterns hung up in mines.
FRENCH    -- Te voilà donc! dit Mme Desforges, en trouvant Mme Bourdelais installée devant un comptoir.
ENGLISH   And drawn yet closer together by this vague fear, the child still holding the girl\'s skirts, and the big boy behind, they made their entry with a smiling, anxious grace.
ENGLISH   And sometimes they are very respectable people.
ENGLISH   They had emptied the palaces, looted the mosques and bazaars.
ENGLISH    Mouret, gazing around, had just felt something grand in himself; but, amid the quiver of triumph with which his flesh trembled, in face of Paris devoured and woman conquered, he experienced a sudden weakness, a defection of his strong will, by which in his turn he was overthrown beneath a superior force.
ENGLISH   The sun was still shining--a fair summer sun, whose golden reflections streamed through the glazed roofs of the halls.
ENGLISH   Clara nudged her neighbour.
ENGLISH   But never speak to me again as you have just done.
FRENCH    Cependant, Bourdoncle, fort de sa résistance passive, pliait l\'échine sous la bourrasque.
ENGLISH   Mouret happened to be there, just at that moment.
ENGLISH   The second-hand cried out: \"Fancy silk, small check, twenty-one yards, at six francs and a half.\"  And then the piece went to increase the heap already on the floor.
ENGLISH   Your dividends astonish the Bourse.
FRENCH   S\'ils fermaient les yeux sur les terribles noces du dehors, ces messieurs ne toléraient pas la moindre gaudriole dans la maison.
FRENCH   Ne voulant pas rentrer avec lui, Denise, qui s\'était fait donner une permission de théâtre, accepta d\'accompagner Pauline chez Baugé.
FRENCH    Et ce fut Denise qui souffrit de l\'aventure.
FRENCH    Tous deux parlaient de Robineau, qui surveillait les commis, tandis que le chef du comptoir était au sous-sol.
FRENCH   Toutes les pâleurs laiteuses d\'un corps adoré se retrouvaient-là, depuis le velours des reins, jusqu\'à la soie fine des cuisses et au satin luisant de la gorge.
ENGLISH   He also had just come out of The Ladies\' Paradise, and seemed even more frightened than herself, still bewildered by the examination through which he had just passed.
FRENCH   Chacune de ses inspections devenait un massacre, on ne le voyait plus paraître, sans qu\'un frisson de panique soufflât de comptoir en comptoir.
FRENCH   Le tapis en était jonché.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! my dear,\" she stammered, \"you\'ve no idea! They have a wonderful assortment of bonnets.
FRENCH    Et il laissa échapper ce cri du coeur:  -- Ah! si je pouvais me passer de vous!...
FRENCH   Mais, lui, répondait toujours non.
FRENCH   Enfin, dans un dernier effort, Mouret avait presque convaincu le baron Hartmann.
FRENCH   Toutes, en face de cette cataracte lâchée, restaient debout, avec la peur sourde d\'être prises dans le débordement d\'un pareil luxe et avec l\'irrésistible envie de s\'y jeter et de s\'y perdre.
FRENCH   Elle ne montra une invincible répulsion que pour Clara, car elle avait appris que cette fille s\'était amusée, comme elle en annonçait en plaisantant le projet, à mener un soir Colomban chez elle; et le commis, emporté par sa passion enfin satisfaite, découchait maintenant, tandis que la triste Geneviève agonisait.
ENGLISH   But he stood quivering amid the noise made by a neighbouring squad of packers nailing down the cases.
FRENCH    -- Rue de Rivoli, au coin de la rue d\'Alger...
FRENCH    -- Oh! sans doute, murmurait-elle, une soie de cinq francs soixante n\'en vaudra jamais une de quinze, ni même une de dix.
ENGLISH   After spending a few evenings together there in the first novelty of the thing, the saleswomen now never entered the place without coming to high words at once.
ENGLISH   In the winter they were obliged to keep the gas burning all day, and when the weather enabled them to do without it the room seemed more melancholy still.
ENGLISH   If he still delayed the marriage which had been decided on three years previously, it was because a scruple had come to him, a fixed resolve to act in all honesty.
ENGLISH   They won\'t catch me like that.\"  And thereupon she developed quite a theory of careful housekeeping.
ENGLISH   The Baudus\' vault was reached by the first path on the left.
FRENCH   Mouret...
ENGLISH    When Mouret returned to his office he was almost choking with sobs.
FRENCH    Il leva ses gros yeux embroussaillés, resta surpris de la voir.
ENGLISH   Hutin smiled, delighted, and giving the other a friendly look of approval; for after having himself introduced Bouthemont to The Ladies\' Paradise, in order to get rid of Robineau, he was now undermining him also, with the firm intention of depriving him of his berth.
ENGLISH   When the little one was crawling about on all-fours, neither of them had room to move.
FRENCH   C\'était un déballage général, une confusion apparente d\'étoffes, étudiées, retournées, marquées, au milieu du bourdonnement des voix.
FRENCH   Toujours des filles aux allures étranges rôdaient devant son comptoir; et l\'on venait d\'arrêter une d\'elles, les hanches garnies et la gorge bourrée de soixante paires de gants.
ENGLISH   What with the laughter, the calls and the clatter of plates and dishes the uproar became deafening; the candles flared and guttered in the draught from the open windows, whilst moths fluttered about in the air warmed by the odour of the food, and traversed by sudden cold gusts of wind.
ENGLISH   So I wanted to tell you not to trouble on my account.
FRENCH    -- Laissez donc! c\'est une cocotte...
FRENCH    -- Où donc? demanda Baudu.
ENGLISH   And, still trembling with pity, shocked by so much suffering, she could not contain herself; and, to begin with, ventured to speak of Bourras, that poor old man who was down and whom they were about to ruin.
FRENCH   Sa fille Valentine l\'examinait déjà.
ENGLISH   And she did not dare to go down again.
FRENCH   Ce n\'est pas moi qu\'ils attraperont!  Et elle fit toute une théorie de bonne ménagère.
ENGLISH   Yes, he would be as bored at the Ministry on the morrow as he had been on the day before.
ENGLISH   We\'ll talk about it again.\"  The outer bell had just rung.
ENGLISH   Denise saw some tartan at nine sous, some strips of American bison at a franc the mètre, and some mittens at five sous a pair.
ENGLISH    But it was too late, Geneviève must have heard, for her face was white and bloodless.
FRENCH   Pourtant, si les anciennes crevasses reparaissaient, si les taches d\'humidité avaient repoussé sous les dorures, la maison tenait toujours, entêtée, collée au flanc du Bonheur des Dames, comme une verrue déshonorante, qui, bien que gercée et pourrie, refusait d\'en tomber.
ENGLISH   \"You\'ll only make yourself worse, and we are quite numerous enough to do the work.\"  \"That\'s what I told her,\" declared Madame Aurélie, \"but she insisted on coming down to help us.\"  All the young ladies flocked round Denise.
ENGLISH   He simply works to keep his looms going, for a loom that stands still is a dead loss.
ENGLISH   Every one noticed his wonderful good humour during the ceremony, his victorious gesture as he made the first stone fast with a flourish of the trowel.
ENGLISH   Ask aunt.\"  Without opening her lips, Madame Baudu confirmed these words by a nod.
ENGLISH   \"I only want fifty or sixty.
FRENCH   Seulement, si tu savais quelle maison!.
FRENCH   Et vous entendrez la plainte furieuse de nos concurrents.
FRENCH   Puisque ça vous déplaît, je n\'irais pas vous marier, bien sûr.
ENGLISH    \"I love her, and I\'ll win her!\" said he.
FRENCH   Un garçon boulanger occupait la première chambre; et c\'était l\'autre, celle du fond, qui se trouvait vacante.
FRENCH    Depuis longtemps, Mouret n\'était plus à l\'entresol, debout près de la rampe du hall.
FRENCH    Il ne l\'entendait pas, ses yeux de flamme dévoraient les démolisseurs, dont la pioche entamait la façade de la masure.
ENGLISH   \"Just listen, little sister; she\'s a tall, dark girl; we went to the café with her brother.
FRENCH   D\'abord, il n\'y eut qu\'un tapage violent de fourchettes, une goinfrerie de grands gaillards aux estomacs creusés par treize heures de fatigues quotidiennes.
FRENCH   Si l\'on clabaudait toujours, par cette démangeaison de langue qui ravage toute réunion d\'hommes et de femmes, on s\'inclinait très bas, jusqu\'à terre.
FRENCH    -- Ce vieux singe d\'inspecteur! Ah! ma chère, ne vous y fiez point...
FRENCH   Alors, elle fut reprise du froid de la veille, elle crut qu\'elle avait simplement peur de lui.
ENGLISH    \"Ah! thank heavens!\" said Mouret, \"you look better this morning.
ENGLISH   Roads with grass on each side, eh? and now and again sheep browsing in couples, dragging their clog along by the rope.\" She stopped, then resumed with a vague smile: \"Our roads run for miles as straight as arrows between rows of trees which afford some shade.
ENGLISH   \"It\'s delicious, isn\'t it? And that little bird, do look, Valentine! I must take it!\"  However, Madame Guibal began to feel tired of standing still in the eddying crowd, and at last exclaimed:  \"Well, we\'ll leave you to make your purchases.
ENGLISH   Then, too, the books had to be got together, gummed or sewn.
ENGLISH   To the left could be seen a scullery with stone sinks as large as ponds; whilst on the other side, to the right, was a huge meat-safe, where a glimpse was caught of numerous joints of red meat hanging from steel hooks.
FRENCH   Pour fêter l\'inauguration, on avait ajouté des trophées, des drapeaux; chaque étage se trouvait pavoisé de bannières et d\'étendards aux armes des principales villes de France; tandis que, tout en haut, les pavillons des peuples étrangers, hissés à des mâts, battaient au vent du ciel.
ENGLISH    He returned downstairs and visited the central cashier\'s office, where four clerks guarded the two giant safes, through which eighty-eight million francs had passed during the previous year.
ENGLISH    In the evening, after the last dinner, he sat waiting in his office, trembling like a young man about to stake his life\'s happiness, unable to keep still but incessantly going towards the door to listen to the hubbub in the shop, where the employees, submerged to the shoulders in a sea of stuffs, were now doing the folding up.
ENGLISH   You are very welcome.\"  She was struggling now.
FRENCH   Il ne me reste qu\'à les coucher.
FRENCH   Hutin et Favier chantaient victoire à la soie, aussi bruyamment que Marguerite et Clara triomphaient aux confections.
ENGLISH   Good-bye.
FRENCH   Le Vieil Elbeuf, tendu de drap blanc, éclairait la rue d\'une tache blanche; et les cierges, brûlant dans le jour bas, semblaient des étoiles noyées de crépuscule.
FRENCH   C\'était sûrement d\'avoir monté trop vite.
FRENCH   On se murmurait le nom de la jeune fille, les dos s\'enflaient, les nez tournaient à la friandise.
ENGLISH       CHAPTER VI.
ENGLISH   He must have been questioning her.
FRENCH    Après un silence pénible, ce fut Mouret lui-même qui parla des Baudu.
ENGLISH   But her whole being rose up in protest, against the disgrace of the thing.
FRENCH    Mais Hutin menaça de le signaler à la direction, s\'il ne respectait pas davantage la clientèle.
FRENCH   C\'était comme la revanche du foyer détruit, pendant que la mère avait recommencé ses parties fines entre femmes, et que le père, de son côté, continuait à jouer du cor.
FRENCH   Le sourd travail de Hutin, la mine qu\'il creusait depuis de longs mois sous les pieds du second, allait enfin éclater.
ENGLISH   Don\'t leave me; I\'m afraid to be left alone.\" However, when she perceived Denise, Geneviève became calmer, and smiled joyfully.
FRENCH    Puis, de sa voix sèche:  -- Quand vous me regarderez, mademoiselle, ça ne corrigera pas le défaut!...
FRENCH    -- Le Bon Marché est bien province, murmura Mme Marty, et l\'on est si bousculé au Louvre! Ces dames étaient retombées sur les grands magasins.
ENGLISH   \"Be quiet! young ladies.
FRENCH   Après toutes ces histoires...
ENGLISH   \"Come, come, I\'m older than you, I\'m over twenty-six, though I don\'t look it.
FRENCH   Oui, je suis entrée donner un coup d\'oeil.
ENGLISH   Madame Aurélie, although perfectly well aware of what was going on, nourished a secret rancour against her; and seeing her laughing one evening with Pauline she also took it for bravado, concluding that they were gossiping over her son\'s love-affairs.
FRENCH   Denise, qui écoutait comme on écoute un conte de fées, eut un léger frisson.
FRENCH   Soyez aimable, venez ce soir tremper une tartine dans une tasse de thé.
FRENCH   Aussi accueillait-elle avec une joie rieuse les moindres témoignages d\'amitié, ce qui la fit réellement aimer de quelques-uns, tellement elle était douce et accueillante, toujours prête à donner son coeur.
ENGLISH   When Monsieur Boutarel, a big, full-blooded man, quite bewildered, left his daughter to search for his wife, he at last found her in a sitting-room, at the door of which he was politely invited to take a seat.
FRENCH    Denise lui assura qu\'elle allait mieux, que cela lui ferait du bien de s\'occuper, de se distraire.
FRENCH   Tout le magasin la connaissait, savait qu\'elle se nommait Mme Boutarel et qu\'elle habitait Albi, sans s\'inquiéter du reste, ni de sa situation, ni de son existence.
FRENCH   Vallagnosc, d\'une voix molle, se plut alors à étaler la platitude des choses.
ENGLISH   The figure was eighty million francs, ten millions more than the previous year.
FRENCH   On avait eu d\'abord de grandes difficultés à établir les sous-sols, car on était tombé sur des infiltrations d\'égout et sur des terres rapportées, pleine d\'ossements humains.
ENGLISH   It was with him, as with Bourdoncle, a superstition that the head of a great drapery establishment ought to remain single, if he wished to retain his masculine sovereignty over the growing desires of his world of female customers; for the introduction of a woman to the throne would change the atmosphere, drive away all the others.
ENGLISH   In point of fact the idea of the Crédit Immobilier was to found in the Rue du Dix-Décembre a huge rival to the Grand Hôtel, a luxurious hostelry whose central position would attract foreigners.
FRENCH   C\'était la mort lente, sans secousse, un ralentissement continu des affaires, des clientes perdues une à une.
ENGLISH   A few sentences had sufficed, he guessed the rest, and such a gallant exploitation inflamed him, stirring up the memories of his past life of pleasure.
FRENCH   Malgré leur différence de nature, une camaraderie étroite les avait pourtant rendus inséparables, jusqu\'à leur baccalauréat, dont ils s\'étaient tirés, l\'un avec gloire, l\'autre tout juste d\'une façon suffisante, après deux épreuves fâcheuses.
ENGLISH   But it appears that it\'s notorious.\"  There was a silence.
ENGLISH   Some jewellery, a brooch, and watch-chain, glistened on her close-fitting gown of dark-blue cloth; and she smiled from under a velvet toque ornamented with a large grey feather.
FRENCH   Cependant, elle sortait quelquefois par raison, emmenait l\'enfant, lui faisait faire une longue course à pied, du côté de Neuilly; et leur régal était de boire, là-bas, une tasse de lait chez un nourrisseur, qui les laissait s\'asseoir dans sa cour.
ENGLISH    \"Was she there?\" asked Denise, when the other had entered.
FRENCH    Alors, Mme Robineau, assise par terre, la tête à la hauteur du brancard, la joue contre la sangle où gisait son mari, soulagea son coeur.
ENGLISH    A long line of cabs prevented her from quitting the pavement alongside The Ladies\' Paradise.
FRENCH   La porte retomba, et il crut entendre le ricanement de Vallagnosc, étouffé par les tentures.
FRENCH   Elle répondit doucement:  -- Si M.
ENGLISH    And whilst Favier was measuring it, she made a last attempt with Bouthemont, who had remained near her.
ENGLISH   Forty millions! Think of that! No doubt the net profit did not exceed more than four per cent., given the heavy general expenses, and the system of low prices; but sixteen hundred thousand francs was still a handsome sum; one could well be satisfied with four per cent., when one operated on such a scale as that.
ENGLISH   All this time, the hum of voices continued behind her.
ENGLISH   Powerful electric lamps were established, and then the uproar became continuous.
FRENCH   Le corridor longeait le réservoir, un énorme cube de tôle qui contenait soixante mille litres d\'eau; et il y en avait, sur le toit, un second d\'égale grandeur, auquel on arrivait par une échelle de fer.
ENGLISH    In the lace department the crush was increasing every minute.
FRENCH   L\'énorme succès du magasin venait de cette séduction galante.
ENGLISH   When business slackened the workmen lost their daily bread; and this went on amidst the subdued working of the machine, the useless gear was quietly thrown aside, like so much old plant.
ENGLISH    On the second floor the journey began afresh.
ENGLISH    This time he himself had become motionless, and stood there gaping.
ENGLISH   With a smile he looked at her in her simple silk dress, without a single piece of jewellery, displaying only the luxury of her royal, blonde hair.
ENGLISH   Then, as the saleswomen were slyly grinning at this family explanation, she resumed severely: \"Now, Mademoiselle Vadon, don\'t let us go to sleep.\"  \"Twenty cloaks, cashmere extra, fourth size, at eighteen francs and a half,\" resumed Marguerite in her sing-song voice.
FRENCH   Elle doit encore pleurer l\'incendie des Quatre Saisons.
FRENCH    Elle n\'ouvrait pas la bouche, elle se laissait arranger.
FRENCH   Et, avant même de savoir ce que celle-ci désirait, elle lui parla bas, très émue des bruits dont causait le magasin entier.
FRENCH    Denise, depuis le matin, subissait la tentation.
FRENCH    -- Oh! monsieur Mouret, je vous en prie, taisez-vous! Oh! ne me faites pas plus de peine encore!...
FRENCH   Mais il la regardait toujours, dans sa petite robe noire, coiffée de son chapeau garni d\'un seul ruban bleu.
FRENCH    -- Allons donc! murmura-t-il, c\'est une plaisanterie! Elle est trop laide.
ENGLISH   They laughed and joked at poor Joseph, and their ferocious sallies were wafted into the pattern-room.
ENGLISH   That day they were so heavy, there was such a quantity of silver and copper, that he had been obliged to enlist the services of two messengers.
FRENCH   La maison trop petite! une maison de nouveautés où il y avait dix-neuf rayons, et qui comptait quatre cent trois employés!  -- Mais sans doute, reprit Mouret, nous serons forcés de nous agrandir avant dix-huit mois...
ENGLISH   Along the Rue du Dix-Décembre, lately opened to the public, a crowd of idlers now stood from morning till night, looking up, seeing nothing, but nevertheless interested in the marvels related of this façade, the inauguration of which was expected to revolutionize Paris.
ENGLISH   The pupils of her grey eyes were as contracted as those of a cat coming out of the broad daylight, and she had the restful feeling, and clear expression of a person just waking up.
FRENCH   Des ballots de marchandises sombres montaient jusqu\'aux solives.
ENGLISH   On raising his eyes he had perceived in front of him, at the corner of the Rue d\'Alger, the lighted windows of Madame Desforges\'s flat whither he was bound.
FRENCH   C\'était le coup de terreur des congés, les renvois en masse dont la direction balayait le magasin, vide de clientes pendant les chaleurs de juillet et d\'août.
FRENCH    -- Ah! bon! murmura Liénard qui avait entendu, il s\'agit de la demoiselle à l\'entorse...
ENGLISH    \"So he does just what you wish him to, all the same,\" said Pauline.
ENGLISH   Besides, there\'s nothing unpleasant in ruining one\'s self when one feels capable of building up another fortune.
FRENCH   Des vendeuses en sortaient, y rentraient vivement, laissant chaque fois deviner, dans le battement rapide de la porte, des visions de dames en chemise et en jupon, le cou nu, les bras nus, des grasses dont la chair blanchissait, des maigres au ton de vieil ivoire.
FRENCH   Les paquets que les clientes n\'emportaient point, y étaient descendus, triés sur des tables, classés dans des compartiments dont chacun représentait un quartier de Paris; puis, par un large escalier débouchant juste en face du Vieil Elbeuf, on les montait aux voitures, qui stationnaient près du trottoir.
ENGLISH    \"Come,\" said he, \"you are not going to play the savage with me, who always treat you so well.
FRENCH   La nuit, de neuf heures à une heure, elle pouvait en coudre six douzaines, ce qui lui faisait trente sous, sur lesquels il fallait déduire une bougie de quatre sous.
ENGLISH   And these meetings made her regret the shop, and continually brought her back to thoughts of the life the others led there, as if she herself had not quitted it.
FRENCH    Mais elle le fit taire, elle l\'attira dans un coin.
FRENCH   Quarante millions! songeait-on à cela? Sans doute, le bénéfice net se trouvait au plus de quatre pour cent, avec leurs frais généraux considérables et leur système de bon marché.
FRENCH    -- Vous verrez, disait-elle, je me fais faire un corsage pareil avec un satin...
ENGLISH   The whole house now declared that she had formerly had Hutin for a sweetheart; and they were suspected of still meeting from time to time.
FRENCH    -- Oui, monsieur, il le faut.
FRENCH   Ils en arrivèrent à parler des grands herbages entourés de haies vives, des sentiers couverts qui se perdent sous les ormes, des routes gazonnées comme des allées de parc.
ENGLISH   Big shadows loomed before her; she could hardly distinguish the piles of goods, which assumed all sorts of threatening aspects--now they looked like fallen columns, now like squatting beasts, and now like lurking thieves.
FRENCH   Celle- ci, après avoir bu son café, achevait ses pastilles de chocolat.
FRENCH   On n\'entendait plus, au fond des galeries, que les appels attardés de quelques commis vidant une dernière case.
FRENCH   Mouret, si vous voulez le savoir!  Sa voix s\'était étranglée, elle devint plus pâle que lui.
FRENCH    -- Comment! c\'est toi? murmura-t-elle toute pâle.
FRENCH   Mais, aux lainages, le long de la galerie qui revenait perpendiculairement à la rue de la Michodière, Bourdoncle reprit son rôle de grand exécuteur, en apercevant un jeune homme assis sur un comptoir, l\'air brisé par une nuit blanche; et ce jeune homme, nommé Liénard, fils d\'un riche marchand de nouveautés d\'Angers, courba le front sous la réprimande, ayant la seule peur, dans sa vie de paresse, d\'insouciance et de plaisir, d\'être rappelé en province par son père.
ENGLISH   Before the door of the drapery establishment, two shopmen, mounted on a step-ladder, were hanging up some woollen goods, whilst in a window facing the Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin another young man, kneeling with his back to the pavement, was delicately plaiting a piece of blue silk.
FRENCH   Il te faut du courage.
ENGLISH   They had now got the walls up to the first storey; and the entire block was surrounded by scaffoldings, regular towers of timber.
FRENCH    -- Voilà! cria Mouret, quand il eut fini.
FRENCH    -- Ça, non, je vous le jure! cria Denise, s\'oubliant, emportée par le désir de lui donner au moins cette consolation.
FRENCH   Il était repris.
FRENCH   Mais, en garçon rompu aux comédies du vieux négoce, il gardait sa carrure tranquille, son air bonasse, avec son pli de ruse aux lèvres.
FRENCH   Il n\'ouvrit pas la bouche, il continua son inspection.
FRENCH   Alors, la gorge sèche, ne trouvant pas les mots consolateurs qu\'elle aurait voulu, elle dut parler.
ENGLISH   Indeed the first-hand had taken the young girl under her protection with such warmth that the latter must have been recommended to her in a very special manner.
ENGLISH   \"My interest, you know, is not to sell; and I certainly shouldn\'t were it not for my rheumatics----\"  Then stepping to the middle of the shop, he inquired: \"What can I do for you, Monsieur Baudu?\"  The draper, who had been slily listening, thereupon introduced Denise, telling Vinçard as much as he thought necessary of her story and adding that she had two years\' country experience.
ENGLISH   She refused to look at any others, and he was obliged to give way, for the salesmen had orders to take the goods back even if they saw that they had been used.
ENGLISH   Arriving with clear eyes and fresh skin from the cold of the street, she had slowly burnt both sight and complexion, by the contemplation of all that luxury, those violent colours, whose everlasting gallop irritated her passion.
FRENCH   Le pauvre enfant sortait si rarement avec elle! Mais il avait fallu lui acheter du pain d\'épice et une pelle, puis le mener voir Guignol; et tout de suite cela était monté à vingt-neuf sous.
FRENCH   Presque toutes les vendeuses, dans leur frottement quotidien avec la clientèle riche, prenaient des grâces, finissaient par être d\'une classe vague, flottant entre l\'ouvrière et la bourgeoise; et, sous leur art de s\'habiller, sous les manières et les phrases apprises, il n\'y avait souvent qu\'une instruction fausse, la lecture des petits journaux, des tirades de drame, toutes les sottises courantes du pavé de Paris.
ENGLISH   He was indeed very unhappy.
FRENCH    -- Mais, ma chère, disait Mme de Boves, le tablier en était couvert aussi.
ENGLISH   I wish it!\"  \"No, it\'s impossible.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! look at that _faille_ at five francs sixty!\" murmured Denise, transported with astonishment at sight of the \"Paris Delight\".
FRENCH   Elle venait de toucher le fond de son impuissance.
FRENCH   Mais sa vieille robe de laine l\'inquiétait surtout; elle n\'en avait pas d\'autre, elle était forcée de la remettre chaque soir, quand elle quittait la soie d\'uniforme, ce qui l\'usait terriblement; une tache lui donnait la fièvre, le moindre accroc devenait une catastrophe.
FRENCH   La surprise de son amie augmentait, elle demanda enfin:  -- Alors, tout ça, c\'est pour en arriver à ce qu\'il vous épouse?  Du coup, la jeune fille se redressa.
FRENCH    -- M.
ENGLISH   In a few minutes the ceremony was over.
ENGLISH    \"Ah, it\'s you, mademoiselle!\" he said.
FRENCH   Il y avait là un sens nouveau du négoce, une apparente fantaisie commerciale, qui autrefois inquiétait Mme Hédouin, et qui aujourd\'hui encore, malgré de premiers succès, consternait parfois les intéressés.
ENGLISH   Nothing else will be talked of; that blue and silver selvage will be known from one to the other end of France.
ENGLISH   Decidedly his scent was playing him false, he wouldn\'t make four sous! Beneath the amiable propriety of his manners his heart swelled with the rage of a man robbed and devoured by others.
ENGLISH   loss rather than keep an old pattern or any stale material.
ENGLISH   No doubt the old man was irritated, but the excess even of his anger, the blind alley, as it were, in which he found himself, might determine an abrupt acceptance on his part.
ENGLISH   Mignot, on again being questioned, lost his head, and began to sob; he wasn\'t in fault, it was Albert who sent him these girls; he had at first merely afforded them certain advantages, enabling them to profit by the bargains; and at last when they took to stealing, he was already too far compromised to report the matter.
FRENCH   Denise entrait presque tous les jours égayer un instant Geneviève.
FRENCH   Alors, ne sachant plus comment s\'éloigner, égarée tout à fait, elle s\'adressa une fois encore au premier commis venu, à Favier qui se trouvait près d\'elle.
FRENCH    -- Petite méchante, petite bête...
FRENCH   Elle ne mentait pas, cette pauvre fille: c\'était bien son frère, Campion l\'avait parfaitement reconnu.
FRENCH    -- C\'est Bourras, dit une voix derrière son dos.
ENGLISH   The management preferred to hush up such matters as far as possible, considering it undesirable to set the police at work, and thus expose one of the fatal plague-spots of these great bazaars.
FRENCH   Nous ne tenons plus debout.
FRENCH   Après la mort de leur père, qui avait mangé jusqu\'au dernier sou dans sa teinturerie, elle était restée la mère des deux enfants.
FRENCH    Mais elle lui coupa de nouveau la parole.
ENGLISH   It was only outside the shop that they resumed their individual lives, with a sudden flaming of awakened passion.
FRENCH   D\'habitude, au premier coup d\'oeil jeté sur une femme, il disait si elle achèterait, et la quantité.
FRENCH   Nous avons perdu nos parents, j\'ai dû suivre mes frères...
ENGLISH    \"Ah! well,\" resumed Clara, in a low voice, \"that girl won\'t be of much account here even if she does get in.\"  But they all at once stopped talking, for a woman of about forty-five was coming in.
ENGLISH   What power was it she possessed that she should be able to bind him in this way? Had he not seen her without boots to her feet? Had she not been received almost out of charity? He could have understood had it been a question of one of those superb creatures who charm the multitude! but this little girl; this nobody! She had, in short, one of those insignificant faces which excite no remark.
FRENCH   Elle n\'eut rien à ajouter, malgré l\'apitoiement douloureux de ses tendresses.
ENGLISH   How much do you say it cost.\"  \"The Chantilly cost twenty-five francs, and the mounting two hundred,\" said Henriette.
FRENCH   Et de tous les points de la salle immense partaient des conversations semblables, au milieu du vacarme croissant de la vaisselle.
ENGLISH   Around them, on light and elegant shelves, were heaps of plain silks, folded in long pieces of creamy paper, and looking like pamphlets of an unusual size; whilst, encumbering the counters, were fancy silks, moires, satins and velvets, resembling beds of cut flowers, quite a harvest of delicate and precious tissues.
ENGLISH   For a moment she had thought she was going to die in that suffocating heat, amidst all those cries; and she still attributed her faintness to want of air.
ENGLISH    \"There\'s quite a world here!\" declared Madame de Boves.
ENGLISH   At first, on seeing his despairing airs, she had fancied that he was in love with Marguerite, for Marguerite, being very well-conducted, and sleeping in the house, was not easy to approach.
ENGLISH   He only paid her sixty francs a month, with her board, without giving her any commission on the sales, that not being the rule in the old-fashioned houses; but she was treated with great kindness, especially by Madame Robineau who was always smiling at her counter.
ENGLISH   On such a day as this they requisitioned all the employees who were capable of holding a pen: the inspectors, the cashiers, the clerks, even the shop messengers; and each department annexed some of these assistants of a day in order to get the work over more quickly.
ENGLISH   But Clara had invented another amusement: she was teasing the messenger, Joseph, about a passion which he was said to nourish for a young lady in the pattern-room.
ENGLISH   To wound him and induce him to leave, he had already introduced Bouthemont to fill the post of manager which had been previously promised to Robineau.
ENGLISH   Geneviève showed the stuff; and once again the young people found themselves close together behind the counter.
ENGLISH    \"Yes, good luck!\" was Denise\'s reply.
FRENCH   Il n\'avait que ce vice, la musique, un vice secret qu\'il satisfaisait solitairement, courant les théâtres, les concerts, les auditions; malgré son bras amputé, il jouait du cor, grâce à un système ingénieux de pinces; et, comme Mme Lhomme détestait le bruit, il enveloppait son instrument de drap, le soir, ravi quand même jusqu\'à l\'extase par les sons étrangement sourds qu\'il en tirait.
FRENCH   Pour dépister les curieux, qui pouvaient la suivre du regard, elle ne descendit pas directement à la soie; d\'abord, elle parut avoir affaire aux dentelles, elle aborda Deloche, lui demanda un renseignement; ensuite, au rez-de-chaussée, elle traversa la rouennerie, et elle entrait aux cravates, lorsqu\'un sursaut de surprise l\'arrêta net.
FRENCH   À la mort de l\'aîné, sa fille, Caroline, s\'était mariée avec le fils d\'un fabricant de toile, Charles Hédouin; et, plus tard, étant devenue veuve, elle avait épousé ce Mouret.
ENGLISH   With a shrug of the shoulders he seemed to declare he would throw them all over, like so many empty sacks, as soon as they should have finished helping him to make his fortune.
FRENCH   Il fallut un instant à Denise, pour accoutumer ses yeux et distinguer suffisamment les morceaux sur son assiette.
FRENCH   Des voisins chuchotaient, au courant de leur querelle de la veille.
FRENCH    À neuf heures et demie, une cloche avait sonné le déjeuner de la première table.
ENGLISH   All the girls were waiting in the expectation of some catastrophe.
FRENCH    Toute la matinée, cet écrasement augmenta.
ENGLISH    \"Once have the women on your side,\" he whispered to the baron, laughing boldly, \"and you could sell the very world.\"  Now the baron understood.
ENGLISH   At the door the time-keeper had just closed his book, and was making out a separate list of the late arrivals.
ENGLISH   For a moment Jouve remained trying to get his breath back and resume his dignified demeanour.
ENGLISH   It was a faille with a blue and silver selvage, the famous Paris Delight, with which Mouret hoped to strike a decisive blow.
FRENCH   Puisque vous êtes entrés maintenant, vous coucherez toujours en haut, ce soir.
FRENCH   Au fond, les deux commis et la demoiselle continuaient leur besogne avec des paroles chuchotées et sifflantes.
FRENCH   Les voûtins des planchers, les cloisons des distributions intérieures, étaient en briques.
FRENCH    -- C\'est bien, monsieur, nous examinerons l\'affaire...
FRENCH    -- Denise, dit-il simplement, entre donc demain manger la soupe, avec le petit...
ENGLISH    At first she had to surmount the terrible fatigues of her work in the department.
ENGLISH    \"Chicken,\" said Mignot behind him.
FRENCH    La jeune fille se contenta de sourire, gênée, comprenant l\'inutilité des bonnes raisons.
FRENCH   Encore un qui s\'embêtait, faut croire!  D\'autres voix s\'élevèrent, on tombait d\'accord sur l\'idée d\'un suicide, pendant que le sergent de ville verbalisait.
FRENCH   Et, dès qu\'elle apercevait Mouret, qui passait également tous les soirs, un tremblement l\'agitait, elle se cachait vite, la gorge battante.
FRENCH    -- Ils t\'ont payé, finit-elle par dire doucement.
FRENCH   Marty? demanda Mme Desforges.
FRENCH   Enfin, il le prenait donc en défaut, ce Hutin qu\'on donnait pour amant à Denise! il pouvait donc se soulager un peu, en lui faisant sentir durement qu\'il était le maître! Et il exagérait les choses, il finissait par insinuer que la baisse des prix cachait des intentions peu honnêtes.
FRENCH    -- Tiens? dit crûment Hutin à l\'oreille de Favier, la grue de la place Gaillon.
FRENCH    Elle lui ferma la bouche d\'un haussement de ses fortes épaules.
FRENCH   D\'ordinaire, le Bonheur des Dames exigeait de ses vendeuses un stage d\'un an dans une des petites maisons de Paris.
FRENCH   Mouret, un peu vexé, se contenta de dire:  -- Le père Jouve est refait cette fois...
FRENCH   Tu pouvais m\'écrire, je t\'aurais répondu de rester là bas...
ENGLISH   And her thoughts strayed, seeking to judge him.
FRENCH   Il suffisait que Mouret eût dit un mot, tout le monde chuchotait, en la suivant des yeux.
FRENCH    Un jour surtout, la terreur régna.
ENGLISH   But I am going, Denise, and if I called for you last night it was for fear of going off before the morning.
ENGLISH    \"I say,\" murmured Favier, as he went to take some velvet from a shelf behind Hutin, \"there\'s Bouthemont making up to your mash.\"  Beside himself with rage with an old lady, who, after keeping him a quarter of an hour, had finished by buying a yard of black satin for a pair of stays, Hutin had quite forgotten Madame Desforges.
ENGLISH    \"Eighty thousand seven hundred and forty-two francs ten centimes,\" replied the cashier.
ENGLISH   The good reputation of the establishment in which the candidate had started was of great importance, often deciding the question in his or her favour.
ENGLISH   Women plunged their hands into the overflowing heaps, quivering with intoxication at the contact.
FRENCH   Sur l\'étiquette, le métrage était porté, diminué à chaque vente de la quantité vendue; ce qui simplifiait beaucoup le travail.
ENGLISH   She spoke about it to Robineau, who had shown a certain sympathy for her since their first meeting at Vinçard\'s, and he procured her the making of some neckties at five sous a dozen.
ENGLISH   However, the idea of doing the newcomer out of a good customer spurred her on.
FRENCH   Il avait compris, car il questionnait souvent Pauline, tous deux causaient chaque jour de leur amie commune, du coup de tendresse de Mouret, de l\'invitation fameuse qui finirait par dénouer l\'aventure.
FRENCH   Lorsque toutes deux se rejoignaient ainsi, au fond d\'un rayon écarté, elles causaient quelques minutes, l\'oeil aux aguets.
FRENCH   Il hochait la tête, il attendait, de plus en plus troublé, croyant deviner où allait en venir le patron.
FRENCH   Et, dans la bataille qui s\'échauffait, il se promenait devant les comptoirs, les dents longues, voulant sa part, jalousant jusqu\'à son chef, en train de reconduire la jeune femme maigre, à laquelle il répétait:  -- Eh bien! c\'est entendu.
FRENCH   Ce comptoir avait grandi, depuis le jour où Mouret s\'était amusé à risquer, au même endroit, une petite table de proposition, couverte de quelques bibelots défraîchis, sans prévoir lui-même l\'énorme succès.
ENGLISH    \"Oh! a hussy!\" replied the other.
FRENCH   Mon Dieu! comme vous le disiez autrefois, la fabrication n\'a qu\'à suivre le progrès, par une meilleure organisation et des procédés nouveaux.
ENGLISH   Madame Bourdelais, desirous of making up for her expenditure had again taken her children to the refreshment bar: whither the crowd was now rushing with rageful thirst and appetite.
ENGLISH   It was the highest figure ever attained in one day\'s sales by a draper\'s shop.
FRENCH   Et le déballage encombrait les comptoirs, des robes en toile d\'Asie rose ou bleue pour enfants d\'un an à cinq ans, des costumes de marin en zéphyr, jupe plissée et blouse ornée d\'appliques en percale, des costumes Louis XV, des manteaux, des jaquettes, un pêle-mêle de vêtements étroits, raidis dans leur grâce enfantine, quelque chose comme le vestiaire d\'une bande de grandes poupées, sorti des armoires et livré au pillage.
ENGLISH   Only one of his legs, the left one, was broken above the ankle; it was a simple fracture, no serious complication appeared likely to result from it.
FRENCH   Le chignon est trop haut.
FRENCH    Denise, posément, dit ses raisons, comme elle les disait chez Robineau: l\'évolution logique du commerce, les nécessités des temps modernes, la grandeur de ces nouvelles créations, enfin le bien-être croissant du public.
ENGLISH   One goes at a tortoise\'s pace through life, whilst those who are bare-footed run like madmen.\" Then, noticing that his friend seemed troubled, he took his hand in his, and continued: \"Come, come, I don\'t want to hurt your feelings, but confess that your degrees have not satisfied any of your wants.
FRENCH   Dieu est témoin que je m\'en allais pour éviter un malheur pareil!  Elle continuait de se défendre par des paroles entrecoupées.
ENGLISH   The deuce! to think of it, you who professed such scorn for the universal rascality of the present day!\"  \"Of course,\" cried Vallagnosc, innocently, \"when it is a question of other people!\"  However, he got up, and followed his old school-fellow\'s advice.
ENGLISH    Madame Desforges, yielding to the natural antipathy of a contrary nature, annoyed by the girl\'s gentle face, maliciously added: \"No doubt it would set better if the young person\'s gown were not so loose-fitting.\"  Thereupon she cast at Mouret the mocking glance of a Parisienne amused by the ridiculous rig of a country girl.
FRENCH   La petite lingère qu\'il avait eue deux fois, l\'an passé, était gentille au moins.
FRENCH   Moi, la maison peut crouler, on me trouvera sous les pierres.
FRENCH    Marguerite haussa les épaules, en disant:  -- Si vous croyez que c\'est drôle!  Neuf heures sonnaient.
ENGLISH   It was hardly worth his while to contradict me, for she has just received a letter from the governor inviting her to dinner.
FRENCH    Mais sa voix faiblissait, elle cédait peu à peu au désir d\'entrer où entre le monde; et sa crainte se fondait dans l\'attrait irrésistible de l\'écrasement.
ENGLISH   Then intense grief awoke her with a start.
ENGLISH   All the victims of the monster were there--Bédoré and Sister, the hosiers of the Rue Gaillon, Vanpouille Brothers, the furriers, Deslignières the toyman, and Piot and Rivoire the furniture dealers; even Mademoiselle Tatin, the dealer in under-linen, and Quinette the glover, though long since cleared off by bankruptcy, had made it a duty to come, the one from Batignolles, the other from the Bastille, where they had been obliged to take situations.
FRENCH   Aussi quel fichu printemps, toujours de l\'eau! On n\'a acheté que des soies noires.
FRENCH   Ils s\'arrêtèrent, ils demandèrent à Robineau des explications, au sujet d\'un stock de velours, dont les cartons empilés encombraient une table.
FRENCH    -- Mais c\'est mon frère! cria-t-elle avec la colère douloureuse d\'une vierge violentée.
FRENCH    Aux trousseaux, Pauline accourut tout de suite, quand elle aperçut Denise.
FRENCH   Favier n\'arrivait guère qu\'à huit; et voilà que ce sabot lui enlevait les morceaux de la bouche, car il sortait de débiter une nouvelle robe.
ENGLISH   And after noticing her clean little gown and respectable appearance, he replied: \"It won\'t suit you.\"  \"How much is it, then?\" replied Denise.
FRENCH   Il y a des bottes à vingt francs cinquante, ah! des bottes!  Un vendeur les suivait, traînant l\'éternelle chaise, où s\'entassait déjà tout un amoncellement d\'articles.
ENGLISH   Bourdoncle felt himself condemned, swept away, in this victory gained by woman.
ENGLISH   He felt the amorous caress of this glance, the triumph of a woman proud of her beauty and her art.
FRENCH   Mais il lui tenait toujours la main, il l\'appelait sa bonne Henriette, et elle sentit son coeur se fondre.
FRENCH   La lingère, qui serrait toujours les mains de son amie, la regarda un moment en silence, l\'oreille tendue.
ENGLISH   gave as the name of the new thoroughfare the date of his coronation (Dec.
FRENCH    Il gardait des inquiétudes.
ENGLISH   During the afternoon he seemed to have returned to his former healthy gaiety.
FRENCH   Ils réussissent, tant pis pour eux! Moi, je proteste, voilà tout!  La bonne apportait un morceau de veau rôti.
FRENCH   Les piétons s\'envolaient sur les refuges par bandes effarouchées, les trottoirs étaient noirs de monde, dans la perspective fuyante de la voie large et droite.
FRENCH   Le personnel, effaré, bousculé, avait dû passer les deux nuits et la journée entière du dimanche, au milieu d\'un gâchis épouvantable.
FRENCH   Il n\'eut plus le courage de revenir sur cette conversation, il vécut dans la continuelle attente d\'une catastrophe, où son coeur resterait broyé.
FRENCH    -- Voyons, disait-il, vous en avez là-dedans qui ne font pas votre affaire...
ENGLISH    At present, when the thousand employees went in and came out morning and evening, they formed such a long procession on the Place Gaillon that people stopped to look at them as they might at a passing regiment.
ENGLISH   Madame de Boves was not there, and Henriette was getting impatient when she perceived Vallagnosc, who was also looking for his wife and mother-in-law.
ENGLISH   Remember what I told you.
FRENCH    -- Tu as tort, répétait l\'oncle, une femme a toujours besoin d\'un homme.
FRENCH   Ce fut une transfiguration.
FRENCH   Une nourrice, au plus épais, levait très haut son poupon, qui riait d\'aise.
ENGLISH   Everything entered by this yawning trap; it was a continuous swallowing up, a niagara of goods, falling with a roar like that of a torrent.
ENGLISH    Bourdoncle was already occupied with other business.
FRENCH    -- Tu es le dernier, mon brave, finit par déclarer Baudu attendri.
FRENCH   N\'allait-elle pas remettre la main à la machine qui écrasait le pauvre monde? Mais elle se trouvait comme emportée par une force, elle sentait qu\'elle ne faisait pas le mal.
ENGLISH   They must get up a good deal more steam if they were to finish that evening.
ENGLISH   And so out of pure gratitude, the gratitude of a man who knew himself to be adored, he felt obliged to joke in his turn, despite his good-will towards Denise of whose secret charm he was conscious.
ENGLISH   From his office near the door he could see his son\'s pay-desk, which was in the glove department, and doubtless the colloquy had alarmed him.
ENGLISH   Situations are soon snatched up and it might be too late to-morrow.\"  However, before starting, he ordered his junior salesman to go to the railway station to fetch Denise\'s box.
ENGLISH   The dress and costume department was divided; the management creating especially for her benefit a children\'s costume department, which was installed near that of the cloaks and mantles.
ENGLISH   When she at last went away, after saying that she would pay at home, terrified as she was by the amount of her bill, her features were drawn, and her eyes dilated like those of a sick person.
ENGLISH   The vans were sometimes obliged to wait their turn along the street; and as each bale rushed down to the basement there arose a sound as of a stone thrown into deep water.
ENGLISH   The truth was, she dreaded this young man, a bosom friend of Albert\'s, and his accomplice in all sorts of questionable pranks which she feared would some day turn out badly.
FRENCH   D\'ailleurs, on attaquait à peine les casiers, il n\'y avait encore par terre que quelques pièces d\'étoffe.
FRENCH    Marguerite et Clara se mirent à rire, tandis que Mme Frédéric, si discrète d\'habitude, hochait également la tête d\'un air incrédule.
FRENCH   Alors, un chagrin immense l\'éveillait en sursaut.
FRENCH   Déjà, derrière la caisse, Joseph tenait la soie, l\'empaquetait; et le paquet, jeté dans un panier roulant, fut descendu au service du départ, où toutes les marchandises du magasin semblaient maintenant vouloir s\'engouffrer avec un bruit d\'écluse.
FRENCH   Elle croyait rire, parce que j\'en ai à peine dix-sept...
ENGLISH   The room was full, a stream of people were crossing it, entering by the door of the lace department and leaving by that of the under-clothing department, whilst on the right were customers trying on garments, and posing before the mirrors.
FRENCH   Les plans étaient prêts, on attendait seulement le déblaiement de la rue du Dix-Décembre, pour creuser les fondations.
ENGLISH    This seeming and sumptuous tent, fit for a caliph, was furnished with divans and arm-chairs, made of camel sacks, some ornamented with variegated lozenges, others with primitive roses.
FRENCH   Peut-être encore est-elle plus épaisse.
ENGLISH   I\'ve chosen one for myself and one for my daughter.
ENGLISH   Then Mouret glanced up, his face bathed in tears.
FRENCH    -- Alors, c\'est décidé, reprit-il, nous la marquons cinq francs soixante...
FRENCH    Mais un instinct avertit l\'inspecteur.
ENGLISH    Denise became very red.
ENGLISH    \"Well! this is nice behaviour, mademoiselle!\" said he, his lips trembling.
ENGLISH   He had already heard of her dismissal, and promised to find the necktie-dealer.
FRENCH    Cependant, comme chez Robineau, la campagne contre le Bonheur des Dames était ouverte chez Bourras.
FRENCH   Ils étaient si singuliers et si charmants, sur le pavé, ces trois blonds vêtus pauvrement de noir, cette fille triste entre ce joli enfant et ce garçon superbe, que les passants se retournaient avec des sourires.
ENGLISH   What was the matter with the unkempt girl? She was quite strange in her ways that day.
FRENCH   Et les clientes ne venaient toujours pas.
ENGLISH    However, Mouret was still looking at her in his delighted way.
ENGLISH   \"And you, madame, would you not like to see our satins, our velvets? We have some extraordinary bargains.\"  \"Thanks, another time,\" she coolly replied, looking at him no more than she had looked at Mignot.
FRENCH   Des chefs de rayon l\'arrêtaient, il devait résoudre des difficultés, confirmer des ordres.
FRENCH    -- Peut-être ce petit monsieur-là prendrait-il volontiers quelque chose? dit Mme Baudu en souriant à Pépé.
ENGLISH   Madame de Boves was there with her daughter Blanche, both buried amidst the articles which Deloche was showing them.
ENGLISH   Now and again he raised his eyes to his sister, whose burning hand, quivering with sudden starts, astonished him.
FRENCH    Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
FRENCH    Et, après avoir adressé aux étalages d\'en face une dernière moue de colère, il livra passage aux enfants, il pénétra le premier dans la boutique, en appelant sa femme et sa fille.
FRENCH   Tenez, là, dans le buffet.
ENGLISH   That façade, which was at last erected, seemed but trifling in his eyes, very much like one of those walls of sand that children build, and it might have been prolonged from one end of the city to the other, elevated to the starry sky and yet would not have filled the void of his heart, which only the \"yes\" of a mere child could satisfy.
FRENCH   Et, seule, Mme Aurélie restait là, immuable, dans la cuirasse ronde de sa robe de soie, avec son masque impérial, qui gardait l\'empâtement jaunâtre d\'un marbre antique.
ENGLISH   The letter dropped on the floor and Denise was still gazing at the window, dazzled by the glare of the sun.
ENGLISH    \"In that case, why marry?\" was Mouret\'s simple question.
ENGLISH    Mouret put his usual question: \"How many letters this morning, Levasseur?\"  \"Five hundred and thirty-four, sir,\" replied the chief clerk.
FRENCH   Je portais encore des robes courtes, que déjà Colomban était pour moi...
FRENCH   Il y en a vingt-six mètres.
ENGLISH   Madame Guibal barely glanced at it.
FRENCH   Puis, lorsque toutes brûlèrent, il y eut un murmure ravi de la foule, la grande exposition de blanc prenait une splendeur féerique d\'apothéose, sous cet éclairage nouveau.
FRENCH   La tête sous le couteau, je dirai non, tonnerre de Dieu!...
FRENCH   Quand on pense qu\'il parlait de créer, là- dessous, un salon de lumières, pour juger la couleur des étoffes au gaz, une pièce souterraine qui aurait relié la bonneterie à la draperie! Et il ne dérange plus, il ne peut avaler qu\'un vieux démoli de mon espèce lui barre la route, quand tout le monde est à genoux devant son argent...
FRENCH    -- Madame Aurélie! appela-t-il d\'une voix brève.
FRENCH   Dès la lingerie, Mme Desforges se plaignit: était-ce ridicule, ces bazars où il fallait faire deux lieues pour mettre la main sur le moindre article! Mme Marty se disait aussi morte de fatigue; et elle n\'en jouissait pas moins profondément de cette fatigue, de cette mort lente de ses forces, au milieu de l\'inépuisable déballage des marchandises.
FRENCH    -- Je vous promets d\'étudier la question, finit-il par conclure, en haussant le ton, de manière à être entendu d\'un bout du couloir à l\'autre.
ENGLISH   \"It isn\'t bad, the cut is original, but it doesn\'t seem to me very graceful about the waist.\"  \"Oh!\" interrupted Madame Aurélie, \"it must be seen on the lady herself.
ENGLISH   All at once he understood: the woman he had searched had only been there as a blind; it was the friend who had done the trick.
ENGLISH   There was something up, that was certain.
ENGLISH   \"What! you didn\'t know it?\"  The whole table knew it, they were tired of talking about it since early morning.
FRENCH   La vaste pièce, si tendre et si gaie d\'ameublement, s\'égayait encore de ces voix bavardes, coupées de rires.
ENGLISH   It was a very simple family dinner.
FRENCH   Et M.
FRENCH    1.E.9.
FRENCH   On chuchotait, on la trouvait triomphante; et les paris en reçurent un nouveau contrecoup, on se remit à risquer sur elle du vin d\'Argenteuil et des fritures.
FRENCH   Certains jours, le dégoût le prenait de sa puissance, il ne lui venait que des nausées, d\'un bout à l\'autre des galeries.
FRENCH    -- Et vous, reprit-il familièrement, avez-vous bien dormi?  Lorsque Mouret eut répondu qu\'il ne s\'était pas couché, il hocha la tête, en murmurant:  -- Mauvaise hygiène.
FRENCH    D\'autres commis s\'installaient autour d\'eux.
FRENCH    -- Et pour qui? reprenait Denise, pour une rien du tout!...
ENGLISH   That would be too cowardly, wouldn\'t it?\"  Colomban, greatly relieved, had seated himself on a pile of molleton.
ENGLISH    Henriette, robed in a lace dress, which revealed her delicate neck and wrists, looked at them with her clear eyes without any sign of embarrassment; standing between the two, raising her head, and going from one to the other she indeed appeared delighted to see them so friendly together.
ENGLISH   Flattered at heart by Favier\'s words he nevertheless replied with a scornful air, \"I don\'t care for such scraggy creatures.\" And then he called out:  \"White Poult, thirty-five yards, at eight francs seventy-five.\"  \"Oh! at last!\" murmured Bouthemont, greatly relieved.
FRENCH    Puis, repris par son idée fixe, il brandissait le poing vers la muraille.
ENGLISH    \"Not so loud, please!\" cried Madame Aurélie every now and again, quite unable as she was to hear Denise reading out the articles.
FRENCH   Le troupeau s\'y hâtait, sans un rire, sans une parole, au milieu d\'un bruit croissant de vaisselle et dans une odeur forte de nourriture.
ENGLISH   Why did you bring me here? We ought to have stopped in your room.\"  She knelt down before her, and had begun lecturing her again, when a sound of footsteps was heard in the passage.
FRENCH    -- Tiens! dit-elle, vous achetez un manteau de voyage?  -- Oh! mon Dieu! non, répondit Mme Desforges.
FRENCH   Et le ronflement lointain de l\'inventaire, ces millions de marchandises, criés à la volée, remués à bout de bras, étaient comme un vent chaud qui soufflait la passion jusqu\'à elle.
ENGLISH   She would not come to a decision, however, but complained of the quality of the material, and at last exclaimed: \"Their Paris Delight is a great deal stronger.\"  Robineau restrained himself, assuring her that she was mistaken with a tradesman\'s politeness, all the more respectful, moreover, as he feared to reveal his inward revolt.
ENGLISH   Meanwhile, Madame Aurélie examined her with an anxious pout and could not help saying:  \"My dear, two like you could get into your dress; you must have it taken in.
FRENCH    -- Oh! cette faille à cinq francs soixante! murmura Denise, étonnée devant le Paris-Bonheur.
FRENCH   Amusez-vous donc, ça vous fouettera les idées!  C\'était toujours leur dispute amicale.
ENGLISH   The salesmen had managed to decorate the shelves exclusively with white porcelain pots and white glass bottles.
FRENCH    Heureusement, Baudu n\'était pas sur sa porte, le Vieil Elbeuf semblait mort, derrière ses vitrines noires.
ENGLISH   Had she desired it, which she did not, she could not have played a game better calculated to bring him to her feet, tortured by doubt, desirous of being convinced.
FRENCH   Parfaitement, le Bobin\'-Club...
FRENCH   Les semaines se passèrent, elle allait voir son oncle presque tous les après-midi, s\'échappant quelques minutes, apportant son rire, son courage de brave fille, pour égayer la sombre boutique.
ENGLISH    \"Ah, by Jove!\" exclaimed Hutin, \"if they persist in shoving Robineau on our shoulders, we\'ll make it lively for them!\"  Bourdoncle looked straight at Mouret and then simply made a gesture of disdain, to intimate that he saw how it was, and thought it idiotic.
FRENCH   C\'était au point que lorsqu\'elle rencontrait Baugé dans les galeries, elle affectait de ne pas le connaître.
FRENCH   Alors, comment voulez-vous que nous, avec notre outillage plus restreint, et surtout avec nos façonniers, nous puissions soutenir la lutte?  Robineau, rêveur, oubliait de manger.
FRENCH   C\'était ce chiffre qui révolutionnait les femmes: deux sous de meilleur marché qu\'au Bonheur des Dames, et la soie paraissait plus forte.
ENGLISH   But Henriette, on the alert, had at once perceived the look with which he had first enveloped Denise.
FRENCH   Et, seule, au milieu de ce calme, Mme Bourdelais égayait ses enfants, très haut, comme en pays conquis.
FRENCH   Et des brutalités lui venaient aux poignets, il aurait battu Henriette.
FRENCH   Ces couverts se trouvaient alignés sur de longues tables d\'acajou, placées parallèlement, dans le sens de la largeur; aux deux bouts de la salle, des tables pareilles étaient réservées aux inspecteurs et aux chefs de rayon; et il y avait, dans le milieu, un comptoir pour les suppléments.
FRENCH   La foule flambait sous l\'incendie du soleil de cinq heures.
ENGLISH   They required educating to it; so far their little circle lacked harmony.
ENGLISH   The latter, again silent, gazed at the furniture, and seemed to be looking for something on the ceiling.
FRENCH   Parlez-lui en la première, dites-lui donc qu\'il se suicide.
ENGLISH   Each one watched over a department or province.
FRENCH   Un soir, comme elle se dirigeait vers les marronniers, elle resta saisie: à quelques pas, marchant droit à elle, il lui semblait reconnaître Hutin.
FRENCH   Puis, venait le troupeau, la débandade du soir, neuf sur dix que des amants attendaient à la porte; c\'était, sur la place Gaillon, le long de la rue de la Michodière et de la rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin, toute une faction d\'hommes immobiles, guettant du coin de l\'oeil; et, quand le défilé commençait, chacun tendait le bras, emmenait la sienne, disparaissait en causant, avec une tranquillité maritale.
FRENCH   Et, comme celui-ci répondait que la place manquait:  -- Je vous le disais, Bourdoncle, s\'écria Mouret en souriant, le magasin est déjà trop petit! Il faudra un jour abattre les murs jusqu\'à la rue de Choiseul...
FRENCH   Elle ne protestait plus, sachant qu\'on exigeait une obéissance passive, attendant que la première voulût bien la laisser vendre, ainsi qu\'elle semblait d\'abord en avoir l\'intention.
FRENCH   Écoutez, je dois vous prévenir que tout le monde a la même pensée: oui, on est persuadé que vous lui tenez la dragée haute pour le mener devant M.
FRENCH   Denise, que ces histoires avaient passionnée davantage pour le Bonheur des Dames, au lieu de l\'en détourner, gardait son air tranquille et doux, d\'une volonté têtue de Normande au fond.
ENGLISH   Such stories stirred Denise\'s heart; and now, in Mouret\'s presence, she again felt all her former fears, an uneasiness in which her gratitude struggled against her anger.
FRENCH   Au milieu de ses inventions romanesques, lui-même ne savait plus l\'exacte vérité.
FRENCH   de Boves et Paul de Vallagnosc causaient devant une des fenêtres, les yeux perdus au loin sur le jardin, ces dames s\'étaient rapprochées, faisaient là, au milieu, un étroit cercle de jupes, d\'où montaient des rires, des paroles chuchotées, des questions et des réponses ardentes, toute la passion de la femme pour la dépense et le chiffon.
FRENCH   Si vous saviez comme j\'ai du chagrin! Depuis que j\'ai reçu cette lettre, je ne vis plus...
FRENCH   La Turquie, l\'Arabie, la Perse, les Indes étaient là.
ENGLISH   It will not crimple.
ENGLISH    And her dignity now being saved, having a pretext to join the young ladies who were watching her, she at last left Denise and Mouret alone together, coming out of the pattern-room with a majestic step and so noble an air, that the saleswomen did not even dare to smile.
ENGLISH    \"Don\'t you think it rather gloomy, mademoiselle, that white mount and the black lace?\"  \"Oh,\" she replied, gravely, not a blush colouring her inflated cheeks, \"I saw one made of mother-of-pearl and white feathers.
FRENCH   Et, dès lors, ce fut une rage: Robineau répliqua par cinq francs quinze, Mouret afficha cinq francs dix.
ENGLISH   The inhabitants of the district, and especially the small traders, stirred up by such a show of streamers and decorations, alone formed little groups in the doorways and at the street corners, gazing at the Paradise and venting bitter remarks.
ENGLISH   The pen sputtered; the words \"I have stolen,\" madly, wildly written, went almost through the thin paper, whilst she repeated in a choking voice: \"There, sir, there.
FRENCH    Ils firent de nouveau quelques pas en silence.
ENGLISH   In the corners were more complicated designs, stars composed of parasols at thirty-nine sous whose light shades, pale blue, cream-white, and blush rose, had the subdued glow of night-lights; whilst, up above, immense Japanese parasols, on which golden-coloured cranes soared in purple skies, blazed forth with fiery reflections.
ENGLISH   As they were suffocating in the narrow room, heated by the gas-burner, the servant had to open the window again; and the damp, pestilential air from the yard blew into the apartment.
FRENCH    Cependant, quelques fiacres arrivaient et prenaient la file.
ENGLISH   10); and after Sedan the Republican government ironically retorted by altering the name to the date of his downfall (Sept.
FRENCH   Autour des colonnes, recouvertes de velours rouge, montaient des spirales de dentelle blanche; et, d\'un bout à l\'autre de la pièce, filaient des vols de guipure; tandis que sur les comptoirs, il y avait des éboulements de grandes cartes, toutes pelotonnées de valenciennes, de malines, de points à l\'aiguille.
ENGLISH   Then, their eyes getting more accustomed to the darkness, they saw on the right hand the trunks of the poplar trees, resembling sombre columns upholding the domes of their branches, between which gleamed the stars; whilst the water occasionally shone like a mirror.
FRENCH    -- Ça n\'avance guère, de gifler les gens, murmura-t-il avec flegme.
FRENCH   Les comptoirs, rangés symétriquement, semblaient être des plates-bandes, changeaient le hall en un parterre français, où souriait la gamme tendre des fleurs.
ENGLISH    \"Uncle, pray don\'t excuse him,\" said she.
FRENCH   Elle répétait:  -- Tiens ma robe, Valentine...
ENGLISH    And now Mouret appeared before her with his impassioned face and caressing eyes.
FRENCH   Cependant, son rêve seul avait péché.
FRENCH   Enfin, il venait d\'être définitivement écrasé sous les molletons et les flanelles de son rival, un assortiment tel qu\'il n\'en existait pas encore sur la place.
ENGLISH    Jean and Pépé had not quitted her side, but clung to her as they had done formerly on arriving in Paris, knocked up by their journey.
ENGLISH    \"So you are for those who turned you out into the street?\" thereupon asked Gaujean.
FRENCH    -- Défendez-vous, au moins!...
ENGLISH    Ten o\'clock struck, the uproar of the stock-taking was increasing; and amidst the incessant shouts which rose and flew about on all sides the same news circulated with surprising rapidity: every salesman knew that Mouret had written that morning inviting Denise to dinner.
FRENCH   N\'est-ce pas, Blanche, nous traversons les magasins, pas davantage?  Mais, dès la porte, ces dames étaient perdues.
ENGLISH   But what upset him above all else was to learn that she stopped up all night.